Abhramu The original female elephant could change shape at will. But Abhramu's tribe lost its wings when, moving slowly across the sky, the flying elephants grew weary. When they alighted in a tree, their weight broke the branches. An ascetic meditating beneath was unharmed, but falling branches crushed his students. When the sage cursed the elephants, their wings dropped off. Elephants have been earthbound ever since, trapped in the shapes they were wearing during the unfortunate encounter. (Zimmer 1946)
Aditi An early Indian goddess, Aditi embodies whatever transcends measurement. Her mother Shatarupa divided herself into 13 bodies so that the world might become quickly populated. Aditi, first of these forms, gave birth to 12 Adityas, one for each month. Or she may have had one son, Varuna, so splendid that his presence hurt her eyes; she divided him into 12 parts. Or she had seven normal sons, then gave birth to an egg that rose into the sky to become the sun. She also gave birth to Vishnu (occasionally said to be her consort), Indra, and others. (Berkson; Danielou 1964; Dexter; Dimmitt and van Buitenen; Ions; Jamison; Kinsley 1986; Pattanaik)
Adya In folk tradition in Andhra Pradesh, this is the name of the primal being, born from water as a nubile maiden. As soon as she emerged, she felt sexual desire, so she became a bird and laid three eggs on the cosmic lotus. Only two hatched. From one came all of the earth and sky, while from another came the three primal gods. Adya nursed Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva until they were old enough to mate, then decked herself in flowers and invited them to make love with her. Only Shiva was willing to do so, but he asked the boon of having a third eye. But in granting that boon, Adya lost her youthfulness and became an old woman. Her desire drained off into her divine children, and Adya became a warrior who attacked and killed demons. See also Pedamma-Mariamma. (Foulston; Pattanaik)
Alaksmi Sister and opposite of Laksmi, Alaksmi represents all that is difficult about human life. Depicted as an old woman accompanied by crows, Alaksmi travels with hunger, pain, and privation. During her sister’s festival of Divali, Alaksmi appears with bands of evil spirits; for three days, people light lamps to exorcise them. Annually in rural Bengal, a straw image of Alaksmi is created and destroyed, and an image of laksmi put in its place. (Kinsley 1997; Pattanaik; Sharma)
Ali This warrior woman had no time for assignations with men, but the hero Arjuna desired her. Disguised as a swan, he sneaked into her tent, but she recognized the deceit and cast him out. Then he took the form of a serpent and raped her while she slept. The result of the rape was a forced marriage. (Pattanaik)
Amba In southern India, Amba is ‘‘Mother Earth.’’ Possibly pre-Indo-European, this mother goddess was assimilated to other Hindu divinities, among them Durga , Pa rvati, and Uma . Into modern times she was honored near Jaipur with dawn sacrifices of black goats. A temple to Amba Bhai, one form of this goddess, can be seen in Kolhapur, in the southwest of Maharashtra province. Built in the 10th century CE, it was badly damaged by Muslim invaders in the 14th century and has never been completely restored, although it was substantially repaired in the 1700s. Images of dancing celestial maidens (see Apsara s) deck the temple, which has separate sections dedicated to the goddess as Laksmi, Kali, and Sarasvati. (Berkson; Danielou 1964; Dehejia; Gupta;Narasimhan; Pattanaik)
Ambika After Durga destroyed the buffalo-demon who threatened the world, devils still lurked about. So the goddess Pa rvati sent forth her feminine power, which appeared as Ambika, ‘‘Little Mother,’’ a surpassingly beautiful woman who lured the demons to their deaths. First she told them she had made a vow never to sleep with anyone who could not defeat her in battle. When the demons approached, she killed them with a supersonic hum. Then she transformed herself into Kali. Jainism, despite being originally a religion without personalized gods, accepted goddesses as sasana-devatas, guardians of the faith. Among these, Ambika (under the name of Kushmandi) was one of the most popular. Women who wish to bear sons invoke this goddess because of her association with fertility. (Cort; Dehejia; Dimmitt and van Buitenen; O’Flaherty)
Ammavaru This creatrix produced three eggs at the dawn of time, each holding one of the great gods (see Adya for a similar myth; she may be the same goddess as Ammavaru). To populate the earth, she intended to have intercourse with her three sons, but two refused. The third agreed, naming as his price the goddess’s third eye, wherein her power rested. When the goddess gave up that eye, her son killed her. She returned in shattered form as the multiple village goddesses called the Gramadevata. The same story is told of Pedamma-Mariamma. (Foulston; Kinsley 1986; Whitehead)
Ankamma In the region of Telugu-speaking people in Andhra Pradesh, central India, this goddess was the central mythic figure. Conveyed through an oral tradition only recently transcribed, her tales constitute an important part of the region’s ethnic heritage. Her major temple is found in Karempu di, where a pierced wall allows the goddess to look out at passersby. (Roghair)
Annadai The earth goddess of the Bagai tribe of central India descended from the heavens in order to make the land fertile. When she arrived, she took root like a plant. When shaken, she produced grains that were sown and grew into food crops. She grew fat until cut down by 12 men who offered some of her body, the kernels of grain, back to the goddess. (Jayakar)
Annapurna This ancient goddess may be an Indian version of the rice goddess found throughout Asia (see Southeast Asia, Dewi Shri). A common household deity, often depicted enthroned and feeding a child from a full ladle, Annapurna is especially significant in Benares, where a harvest festival honoring her is called Annakuta, ‘‘food mountain,’’ because a mountain of rice and sweets fills her temple. A form of Durga or Devi, Annapurna is a mountain goddess, with four mountains bearing her name in central Nepal. (Bernbaum; Hamilton; Larson et al.)
Apsara s When the Hindu gods churned the primordial ocean, the famously wanton dancers called Apsaras emerged, large-hipped and languid, with soft inviting eyes. As forces of desire, they could be tempting or threatening. One famous Apsara, Motini, was imprisoned by a demon who convinced her she was his daughter; when a human hero appeared, she escaped her erstwhile father and, transforming herself into a fierce warrior, protected her beloved in battle. Another Apsara, Rambha, offered a garland of flowers (symbol of her readiness to have intercourse) to a sage, who passed it along to the god Indra. Indra, playfully drunk, put it on the trunk of an elephant, which dropped it in the road, where a horse walked on it. The sage put a curse on Indra that caused Laksmi to return to the primordial ocean of milk, which had to be rechurned to bring the universe back into being. The Apsara Pramlocha was sent by Indra to seduce a sage who had kept his semen within his body for years, thus being close to escaping from the wheel of reincarnation. She brought him such pleasure that he felt that he had lived a century in one night. But, when the night was over, he grew furious at losing his spiritual power. As the pregnant Pramlocha ascended into heaven, her perspiration impregnated the trees, which gave birth to a beautiful woman named Marisa, whose son established human civilization. (Dimmitt and van Buitenen; Jayakar; Pattanaik; Pintchman 1994; Whitehead)
Aranya ni In the Rg Veda, this invisible goddess can be heard by travelers passing through her forests, who think they hear either screaming or bells tinkling. Although generally kind, she can kill if provoked. Aranyani is a goddess of earth’s abundance, offering nuts and berries to those who come near. She may be related to the nature goddesses called Yaksi. (Kinsley 1986)
Ardhanarinara This name, which means ‘‘half goddess, half god,’’ is especially used of Pa rvati with her consort Shiva, but may also be used of Prakrti and her mate Purusa. Sometimes the divinities are depicted as two bodies joined in sexual intercourse, while at other times there is a single body, male on one side, female on the other. The Pura nas say that the divinity came into being when the primary god, Brahma, meditated on the image of Shiva mating with his female half, at which moment Ardhanarinara burst into being. From this time onward, humans and other animals have reproduced through sexual intercourse. (Dimmitt and van Buitenen)
Astangi Devi Among the Dewar of central India, the wind impregnated virginal Astangi Devi with the sun god Suraj and the moon goddess Chandra. Because at that time, humans ate only twigs, Astangi invented rice, bamboo, and other plants to feed her twins something more nourishing. But an envious man set fire to her fields. Putting them out, Astangi let sparks fly into the heavens, which became the stars. She sent her children to live in the sky, patting her daughter on the cheek and leaving marks visible on the moon’s face. (Elwin 1949)
Avidya This obscure goddess hides within herself a dual-sexed god who created the world by dancing. Bedecked in a skull-necklace, she is said to rule the throat chakra, one of the points of energy on the human body. Representing ignorance, she is distinct from illusion (Maya), the latter being a more cosmic force. (Danielou 1964, 2007)
Bagala mukhi This Tantric goddess was born when Vishnu undertook austerities to save the universe from destruction. When he prayed to Tripura-sundari, she brought forth Bagalamukhi, who frolicked in a lake of turmeric until the storm died down, thus preserving the world. Another myth says she protected the world from a demon. Although she intended to kill him, he fell down in worship, an action that saved his life. A final narrative says she was formed when Pa rvati grew tired of waiting for her consort, Shiva, to feed her. She ate him, but he forced her to regurgitate him and transformed her into Bagalamukhi. Bagalamukhi grants magical powers to her worshipers, who experience them as innate skills. These include the power to paralyze others, whether through force or by immobilizing them with love. (Kinsley 1997)
Bahuchara In an attempt to save herself from rape, this heroine cut off her breasts and, bleeding to death, cursed her attacker to impotence. Terrified, the rapist begged for mercy, so Bahuchara mitigated the curse: he would thereafter dress in women’s clothing and serve as her priestess. She remains the special goddess of homosexual men and transgendered people in the state of Gujarat, including the priests called hijra s. Worshiped in a shrine where her only representation is a vulval triangle, she is sometimes seen as part of a trinity, with her two sisters who also killed themselves rather than submit to rape. (Pattanaik; Jayakar; Young 2004)
Bai Tanki Disease, say the Agaria of central India, came into the world because men tried to rape a girl. Bai Tanki, a hardworking and pretty virgin, was gathering wood when the men threw her to the ground. As each one tried to rape her, a disease struck. The penis of one discharged a foul fluid, another found himself covered with itching sores, another could not maintain an erection. But one young man managed to rape the girl despite her magical protection. She dissolved into a stream of water that spread disease all around the world. (Elwin 1949)
Band amma This regional goddess of Andhra Pradesh is celebrated in a great festival just before the monsoons cool the land, when her worshipers offer tribute to the goddess in hope that she will protect them from disease. The week-long festival offers the goddess entertainment in homes, then leads her to the fields where sacrifice is offered. The goddess is embodied in a square-headed armless statue. (Tapper.)
Basmoti Among the Parenga of Orissa, this earth goddess ate so much at a feast that she started to vomit. From her vomit, seven girls and five boys sprang forth. The girls were every kind of rice and millet, which now bear their names, just as their mother gave her name to a kind of rice. With their brothers, the seven sisters descended to the earth and brought abundance. (Elwin 1954)
Behmata Goddess of fate in northern India, she sat by the side of the sea making marriages by twisting rope and tossing the ropes into the waves. When two ropes sank, the marriage was doomed to be short and unhappy, but if they floated across the waves, the marriage would be long and happy. (Wadley)
Bhagavati Kerala’s most important goddess, Bhagavati may have developed from the Tamil war goddess Korravai (see Kotavi). A benevolent virgin mother, Bhagavati has little mythology except the story that, as the warrior Bhadrakali, she banished a demon king. Thousands of temples are devoted to Bhagavati as an earth goddess. As such, she reincarnates as a lower-caste man, who lives in the temple and serves as an oracle. Similarly, in ritual reenactments of the goddess’s victory over the demon, men enact the goddess’s role, dressed in artificial scarlet breasts. In Cochin, pilgrims annually desecrate the goddess’s shrine with stones and curses, which provides immunity from disease for a year. In her Chengannur temple, Bhagavati is depicted as a young woman dressed in a white cotton shift and a silk sari. The image irregularly menstruates, with red stains found on its shift, whereupon the temple is closed for three days, after which the goddess’s image is bathed. The stained petticoat is an object of devotion. In addition to being a name, Bhagavati, meaning ‘‘Holy One,’’ or ‘‘Divine One,’’ is a common goddess epithet in India. (Caldwell; Dehejia; Gentes; Hawley and Wulff 1996; Pintchman 2001)
Bharat Mata ‘‘Mother India’’ was the creation of Sarala Devi, who in 1903 organized the first festival to this neo-goddess. A nationalist artist depicted the subcontinent as a four-armed goddess dancing on lotus flowers. The image became an icon in the struggle for independence from the British Empire. The power of the new goddess sustained itself after independence. Pilgrims to her temple in Hardwar find a huge map of India and an image of Bharat Mata holding milk and grain. She remains a popular goddess to whom temples are still built, including a temple complex erected after the 1983 AllIndia Sacrifice for Unity. That festival brought an image of Mother India around the country for six weeks. In some cases, devotion to Bharat Mata has been connected with anti-Muslim agitation. (Dehejia; Hawley and Wulff 1996; McDaniel 2004; Ramaswamy; Subramaniam)
Bhavani ‘‘Bestower of existence’’ is a wilderness goddess from the Osmanabad desert. Without consort or children, she represents that area’s stark earth as well as being the primary goddess of the warrior people called the Marathas. As Tulja Bhavani, she was important in the 17th century, when she presented a sword to the local ruler with instructions that he should treat invading Muslims the way the goddess Durga  had treated the buffalo-demon. The king was successful at driving the invaders from the land, after which many temples were built to Bhavani. (Danielou 1964; Dehejia; Gupta, Sanjukta; Kinsley 1986)
Bhogavati According to Puranic literature, this princess unwittingly married a snake disguised as a man. Learning the frightening truth, she did not turn away from him but remained his loyal wife. When her husband later learned that his form came from a curse that could be undone should a virtuous woman bathe him in a sacred lake, he asked Bhogavati to perform the service. When she did so, her husband revealed himself as a handsome prince. (Pattanaik)
Bhudevi A form of the earth goddess, Bhudevi’s myth tells how, floating on the cosmic sea, she was attacked by a demon. Vishnu, hearing her cries, leaped into the ocean in the form of a wild boar, goring the demon into releasing Bhudevi. As the couple rose together into the light, they embraced, and Bhudevi’s womb swelled with life, for the god had impregnated her with hills and valleys. Into the new earth Vishnu plunged his tusks, filling it with seed. As a result of this mating, Vishnu was named guardian of the earth. Vishnu also wed Laksmi, but the two wives fought constantly. Once, he was given a magical tree that both wives wanted. When Bhudevi received the tree, she used the gift to taunt Laksmi. So Vishnu decreed that the tree would only bloom on the side facing Laksmi’s home. When Laksmi teased Bhudevi about the beautiful flowers, Vishnu further decreed that the flowers would bloom only when he was making love with Bhudevi. At one point, Bhudevi grew angry at humanity for being ungrateful to her. Seeds became sterile, and no plants bore fruit. Famine struck. Vishnu demanded that Bhudevi return fruitfulness to the earth, but she turned herself into a cow and ran away. He pursued her, but when captured she remained adamant in her refusal. To bring back the goddess’s affections, Vishnu promised to protect her from greed. He agreed to teach proper techniques of agricultural economy to the people. With that pledge, Bhudevi returned. (Ngaranjan; Pattanaik)
Bhuvanesvari The Tantric goddess Bhuvanesvari was born as the world was created from Tripura-sundari. Bhuvanesvari represents the tangible world. The universe arises from her, rests on her, and disintegrates into her. Crimson-faced and threeeyed, crowned with the lunar crescent and with jewels, her hair black as bees, Bhuvanesvari is so beautiful that Shiva created his third eye so that he would have more enjoyment in viewing her. She too has three eyes, to watch over her world. One of her major symbols is the yonic triangle, a symbolic representative of the female genital region, for she is the essence of woman’s reproductive power. She controls all phases of creation, from emergence through maintenance to final destruction. (Kinsley 1997; Pintchman 2001)
Bijaldai Kaniya Among the Baiga of central India, this lightning spirit was held captive by a young man. Escaping, she became lightning flashing across the sky while he, shooting his arrows at her, made the sound of thunder. The Dhanwar of the same region say that Bijaldai Kaniya was born from a lovely fat woman named Panbijiya Rani, a virgin, who was impregnated by the wind and who, burned black as her daughter exploded out of her, became the leaf-scorpion. In another version of her tale, told among the Dewar people, Bijaldai Kaiya was born from a virgin, Beti Bidyarsin, who was impregnated by the seed of a king who masturbated while admiring her bathing in a river. She shone so brightly at birth that she was enclosed in a bamboo reed so that her brilliance would not blind her potential husband. When he had married her, however, he ignored the instructions not to open the bamboo reed until he was safely at home. Tearing it open along the way, he freed Bijaldai Kaiya, who ran away from him into a bamboo grove, where she continues to live, always hunted by her thwarted husband. (Elwin 1949)
Bisal-Mariamna A brass pot full of water, called an ‘‘eye-mirror,’’ symbolizes this Mysore goddess of sunlight. Into the pot, worshipers put pepper leaves and coconut flowers; a small metal mirror leans against it. One of seven sister goddesses, Bisal-Mariamna is worshiped in an unroofed shrine into which sunlight pours. (Whitehead)
Bomong The cosmic goddesses of the Minyong were Bong and Bomong. Daughters of earth and sky, they glowed from birth, growing brighter and brighter under the care of a treasured nurse. They loved her so much that when she died, they died too. In the darkness that followed, earth’s creatures grew afraid. Thinking that the nurse had stolen the light, they dug up her body. But it had rotted away except for the eyes, which held images of Bong and Bomong. The people, thinking they had the goddesses back, took the eyes to a stream and washed them. Then a carpenter carefully cut the images from the reflecting eyes, and the two girls jumped back to life. The people did all they could to keep the goddesses. But Bomong ran away into the sky. Her brilliance made the earth crack. Bong followed her, shining brightly but not unbearably. People fainted from the heat, so they sent a frog to kill Bong. He shot her twice, and she fell dead. Her body lay until a rat dragged it to Bomong who covered herself with a rock in sorrow. A rat, a bird, and a cock went to find Bomong, who said that she would never return until her sister was revived. In reanimating the goddess, a carpenter made her smaller so that she could become a moon. (Elwin 1958, 1955 NEFA)
Brag-srin-mo The Tibetan ancestral goddess encountered a monkey in yogic meditation. Becoming sexually aroused, she encouraged him to mate with her. He claimed a vow of chastity, but Tara explained that his cooperation was necessary for people to be born. Thereafter, Brag-srin-mo bore six little monkeys. When she fed them special food, they lost their tails and fur and became human. (Bonnefoy)
Budi Ma This name or title means ‘‘ancestress’’ or ‘‘old woman’’ and refers to many goddesses of Bengal: Vana Durga, tree goddess; Rupasi, the sheora tree; HathiDhara-Buri, the elephant-catching old woman; and the ancestral goddesses Jatra Budi, Buri Thakurani, and Burhi Mai. As Ghaghrabudi, this goddess was discovered in 1956 in the form a group of egg-shaped stones revealed when floods uprooted an old tree. She is also called Vriddheshvari, ‘‘aged goddess,’’ when adopted into Brahmanical cult, where she is honored as the smiling, bejeweled nurse of the universe. She is often worshiped in aniconic form, embodied in a stone or a tree, to which offerings are made of flowers and animal meat. Her rituals entail dancing and, occasionally, ascetic practices like body piercing. Where her worship is active, villagers mark New Year’s Day by donning new formal clothes to perform their daily tasks. As an aged and revered old woman, she is distinct from the Brahmanic goddesses, who tend to be young and beautiful. Although often shown singly, she is also worshiped together with her consort, the ‘‘old man.’’ (McDaniel 2003, 2004)
Butani-butki The chili pepper, according to the legends of the Gadaba of Orissa, was originally a girl with a very bad temper. She cursed at anyone who tried to be friendly to her. After she died and was cremated, a bit of bone was left over from the pyre. A shaman planted the shard, from which the first chili plant grew. (Elwin 1954)
Candi In ancient India, the moon was a male divinity named Chandra. But Durga had a similar name, Candi. The similarity gave rise to the idea that the moon was a goddess, or a god one month, a goddess the next. The goddess lodged herself in rocks, which are displayed on wooden thrones. Hunters carried a rock sacred to Candi in order to find game. Candi had multiple aspects, being connected with forests, rivers, and humans under different titles. (Dehejia; Sanjukta Gupta; Kinsley 1975, 1986; Manna; McDaniel 2003, 2004; Zimmer 1946)
Chinnamasta  Hindu images show a naked dancing woman cutting off her own head with a sword. Spouts of blood pour from her severed neck into her three-eyed head, which she holds in one hand, and into the mouths of two dancers near her. Sometimes she is shown having intercourse with a god (usually Shiva) while she selfdecapitates, or standing on the love god Kama as he satisfies his consort Rati. Devotees of Tantra display this image to represent both the control of sexuality and its active celebration. Chinnamasta came into being when Parvati grew sexually aroused while bathing, a moment of impurity that turned her skin black. Her handmaids, Jaya and Vijaya, grew hungry as they waited for her to finish bathing, so she tore off her head to feed them. Other versions of the story say that she was engaged in intercourse with Shiva, producing the two attendants Dakii and Varini as he ejaculated into her. She later fed them by cutting off her head. Yet another version has her excited by battle and that she cut off her own head when there was nothing else left to attack. Chinnamasta is associated with the practice of yoga. The subjugation of the instinct for survival, implied in her self-decapitation, has also been connected with war. Finally, she has been connected with ancient unnamed headless sculptures showing squatting women. Worship of Chinnamasta is relatively rare as she has few temples or shrines and is considered a dangerous goddess. In Buddhism, this goddess (as Chinnamun d a) is the fully enlightened Buddha; as such, she is a form of Vajrayogini. (Kinsley 1997; Shaw 2006)
Churalin A woman who dies in childbirth melts into the repository of frustrated maternity called Churalin, a monster that roams the countryside looking for infants to kill. But a Churalin can be tamed into a submissive wife—if a man can find an attractive one, for most are terrible to look at. Distinguishing between the types can be difficult. One man tricked a Churalin into revealing herself by playing sweet music. He married her, and for 20 years she was an ideal wife, but on the day of the marriage of their last child she disappeared. Another story tells of a Churalin captured by a mohini mantra (love spell), as well as the theft of her clothing. She married the man who captured her but, at the wedding of their last child, begged for her clothes to dance at the celebration. The moment she put them on, she disappeared. (Elwin 1980)
Cunda  Once a very powerful Buddhist goddess, Cunda has become less prominent since her heyday in the 9th–12th centuries CE. As the goddess who purified negative karma, she was invoked by believers throughout India and, to a lesser extent, in Tibet and Nepal. The meaning of her name is obscure, but literary sources provide evidence that she was envisioned as a protective goddess whose powers included elimination of epidemics and other diseases. Most importantly, she inspires practices that help her devotees toward enlightenment. (Shaw 2006)
Daini-Api The Abors of the Siang Valley believe that this spirit causes sterility among human women. She was once human herself, but when she offended a water spirit (see Nippong) while she was having her first menstrual period, she was cursed never to bear a child. In sorrow, she haunts streams and rivers, hoping to meet girls who have come to do their laundry after the end of their first menses; Daini-Api has the power to make them barren. (Elwin 1955 NEFA)
Dakadidi Among the Khond of Middle India, she was the primal mother, who with her brother Daspajka conceived the first people while the world was covered with water. Later, when their grandchildren were born and there was still no land, the couple sacrificed one of their granddaughters to dry up the earth so it could be cultivated. Various other versions say that it was the children, not the grandchildren, of the primal woman who were sacrificed. (Elwin 1949)
D akini These powerful female beings, attendants on Kali, reveal themselves in terrifying aspect, sometimes fish-bodied, sometimes huge as an ogre, often eating raw flesh or drinking blood (from which they are called Asrapas, ‘‘blood sippers’’). In Nepal, they are guardians of greater goddesses; two principal ones are lion-headed Singhini and tiger-headed Baghini. In Tibet, the D akini have another aspect, for beneath their horrific guise they grant supernormal powers and insights to the practitioner of yoga. Called Khandroma or ‘‘sky-walkers,’’ these beings appear as beautiful maidens or withered hags. They can be kindly and horrifying, depending on their spiritual mission. These spirits may have some connection to goddesses of the Bon pantheon, where Ma Namkha (‘‘mother sky’’) is among the chief divinities. Although generally described as a collective, some D akinis have individual names. Simhavaktra has the head of a lion and attends Lhamo, while Makaravaktra has a crocodile head. (Atkinson et al.; Beyer; Campbell; Danielou 1964; Dehejia; Shaw 2006)
Da nu This obscure goddess figure appears in early Vedic literature as mother of the Asuras, a divine race, called the Danavas after her. Their name, ‘‘children of Danu,’’ recalls similar names from other Indo-European peoples, especially the Danaids (see Greece) and the Irish Tuatha de Daanan (‘‘people of goddess Danu’’; see Celtic World). It has been hypothesized that such figures descend from an ancient IndoEuropean goddess (*Danu) whose name survives in Europe in the river name Danube; the Vedic Danu may similarly represent primordial waters. She is also described as the mother of a reptilian demon whom the gods defeated. (Dexter; Kinsley 1986)
Depum The creator-mother of the Shimong people of northeastern India, Depum was confined with her brother for years deep in the earth. There, they fell in love with each other and mated, and Depum conceived. She gave birth to creatures of the earth in succession: first fish, then frogs, then other beings. After each delivery, she released her offspring to the earth’s surface. Because of the taint of incestuous love, such creatures lived apart from human beings. (Bhattacharya)
Devaki Devaki’s father was Devaka, uncle of the evil Kansa who opposed the gods and who was born following the rape of his mother Pavanarekha. Devaki’s husband, who had already wed her six older sisters, was Vasudeva. At her wedding, the god Vishnu picked hairs from his own head and from the body of the serpent on which he reclined, prophesying that the hairs would become Devaki’s seventh and eighth sons, respectively. But evil Kansa threatened Devaki, agreeing to spare her only if her sons were killed the moment that they were born. Thus Devaki’s first six sons were killed, but when she was pregnant with the seventh, Vishnu transferred her child to the womb of the kindly Rohini and pretended Devaki had miscarried. Imprisoned while pregnant with Krishna, Devaki gave birth safely and saw her son spirited away to be brought up by the herdswoman Yasoda. An alternative story says that Devaki’s fetus was transferred into a surrogate’s womb while a goddess, Nidra or Durga, took up residence in Devaki’s womb. When Devaki gave birth and the enemy seized the child, the goddess revealed herself and escaped. (Ions; Pattanaik)
Deval Devi This legendary princess of the Rajput culture tended her splendid herds of cattle while mounted on a black mare named Kesar Kalini. When a neighboring king wanted the mare, Deval refused to let him take her but then, fearful of the consequences of refusing the ruler, hid in another kingdom. There she was protected by a foster brother to whom, in gratitude, she gave the magical horse. He in turn promised to protect Deval and her cattle forever. When, later, the young man married, the cattle were attacked during his wedding ceremony. Deval turned into a bird and whispered into his ear that he had pledged to protect her cattle, and so the young man and his bride rode off to the herd’s rescue. The prince was, however, killed in the attempt, as was the magical horse. (Jayakar)
Devasmita When Devasmita was about to be separated from her beloved husband, she asked a boon of Shiva, to whom she was devoted. He gave her two red lotus flowers, telling her that as long as the couple remained true to the marriage vows, their flowers would remain fresh. With this guarantee of chastity in hand, the husband set off on a business trip, but in a distant city he was set upon by some wily and corrupt young men. Learning of the magical flower, they traveled to Devasmita’s town intent upon seducing her, for no other reason than to test the efficacy of Shiva’s boon. The chaste wife realized what was happening and tricked them into drinking heavily drugged wine, after which she took all their clothing and branded them on the forehead with a dog’s pawprint. Once she had finished with them all, she took them to their own city where she sold them back to their fathers as slaves. Then, with her faithful husband, she returned home much richer for her experience. (Ghosh )
Devaya ni This voluptuous young woman was seduced by Kaca, a young man who wished to use her affections to gain access to secrets held by her father, a sage. Kaca had taken a vow of celibacy, so he only flirted promisingly with her, causing her to fall in love with him. Weak with desire and not realizing that he did not intend to satisfy her, Devayani was on the verge of revealing her father’s secrets, which protected the powers of some nearby demons. But when those demons realized that Kaca was about to learn secrets that protected them, they killed him and pulverized his body. Devayani’s father, to satisfy his desperate daughter, spoke magical words that brought Kaca back to life. Over and over, the same actions occurred: the demons pulverized the hero, and the heroine’s father brought him back to life. Finally, the demons ground him to a powder that they put in wine, which was drunk up by Devayani’s father. The clever girl made her father promise to share the secret of bringing back the dead. When Kaca was reborn, in the process killing Devayani’s father, Kaca spoke the magical words and brought the father back as well. But then Kaca refused to marry Devayani, because having occupied her father’s body, he was equivalent to her brother. (Ghosh; O’Flaherty 1975)
Devi All Hindu goddesses are aspects of the powerful Devi. This understanding dates to approximately the 6th century CE, when the text called the Devi-Mahamya, ‘‘glorification of the great goddess,’’ appeared. This and similar texts posit a single goddess whose reality underlies all individual goddesses. This belief integrates the ethnic and cultural divisions among worshipers of goddesses subsumed under her name. Devi transcends categories, including the visible and invisible world. In her identity as Durga, she was born at the beginning of time from the combined anger of the gods, so that she might battle a threatening demon. Her first action was to laugh; her second, to slay the demon; her third, to reveal to the gods that she was in fact their creator and source of all existence. After these actions, she becomes a natural force animating other goddesses. Devi can be a natural object such as a water-filled cleft in rock, a living girl dressed in bright red, or a high-breasted young mother with a girlish face. Her worship often includes decking her images in silk, flowers, and jewelry. Devi can be difficult to distinguish from other goddesses because they hold these elements in common. (Beane; Brown; Chandola; Dehejia; Gatwood; Gupta, Sanjukta; Hawley and Wulff; Hiltebeitel and Erndl; Ions; Kinsley 1986; O’Flaherty 1975; Pintchman 2001; Spivak; Zimmer 1946)
Dhu mavati A little-known Hindu Tantric goddess, Dhumavati is depicted as scarred and dirty, with long breasts and a long nose, black-skinned as a crow. Fierce and unfriendly, fond of blood, Dhumavati eats bones and chews on corpse meat. Born from "the smoke of self-immolating Sati, Dhu mavati has been described as a form of that loyal wife. One legend says that when Sati grew hungry and her mate refused to feed her, she ate him and, when he forced her to vomit, was turned into the frightening Dhumavati. Dhumavati has been connected with Nirrti; both may descend from ancient times, for Nirrti appears in the earliest Vedic texts. In esoteric Tantra, Dhumavati represents the condition of absolute freedom that comes from having given up or lost everything. She offers worshipers happiness, provided they renounce worldly ambitions and possessions. She has few temples, and most of her worshipers are unmarried. Yet a heterodox tradition holds that Dhumavati is a sensual goddess who loves to dance and have wild sexual adventures. (Kinsley 1997)"
Dirghajihvi The demon Dirghajihvi (‘‘long-tongue’’) licked up the gods’ liqueur, soma, whenever it was offered to them in sacrifice. When the god Indra was unable to stop her depredations, he instructed a handsome god named Sumitra (‘‘good friend’’) to seduce her. But Dirghajihvi refused; the god had only one penis, while she had vaginas all over her body. Sumitra returned to Indra with the information, and Indra magically endowed the handsome god with penises all over his body. When he made love to Dirghajihvi, they stuck within her, immobilizing her, until Indra came and killed the demon queen. (O’Flaherty 1985)
Diti If Aditi is ‘‘boundless,’’ her counterpart Diti is ‘‘the bounded one.’’ Both come from a non-Indo-European source, for their children, though supernatural, were never part of the official pantheon. Diti’s children were asuras, called after her the Daityas. They were powerful beings, especially the warrior Maruts. Diti, whose earlier children had been killed by Indra, practiced magic while pregnant again. Indra watched her constantly. When Diti fell asleep, Indra entered her vagina, traveled to her womb, and dismembered the fetus. Even cut to pieces, the fetus was so powerful that it reformed into 49 separate warriors. (Berkson; Danielou 1964; Dimmitt and van Buitenen; Ions; Kinsley 1986; Pattanaik)
Draupadi The heroine of the epic Maha bha rata, Draupadi was brought to life by a king who organized a sacrifice to create an improbably strong warrior. From the fire emerged a man strong enough to meet the king’s needs. At the same time a ravishing young woman emerged, dark-skinned and with blue-black hair, from whose body poured forth the fragrance of lotus blossoms. From the moment of her birth, the king hoped that she would wed the hero Arjuna. When she was old enough to wed, the king organized a contest for her hand. The winner had to string a rigid bow, then, using a pond as a mirror, shoot in the opposite direction, hitting the eye of a wooden fish turning on a wheel. Only one could perform such a feat. Arjuna won, but the other contestants did not take defeat well. He had to fight them all in order to leave with Draupadi. When they arrived home, Arjuna’s mother Kunti called out, ‘‘whatever you won, you must share equally.’’ Thus Draupadi became polyandrous, sleeping in turn with each of her five husbands, the Pan d avas. Several alternative stories describe why she "had five husbands. In one, she was so eager to marry that she invoked Shiva five times, for each of which invocation she received a husband. In another, Draupadi was the incarnation of Laksmi (or Indrani), married to five incarnations of her consort Vishnu (or Indra) at once. When her oldest husband gambled her away, Draupadi’s virtue protected her. As her attackers attempted to drag her sari from her, it lengthened into hundreds of yards of material, so that Draupadi was never naked. Humiliated nonetheless, she pledged to wash her hair in her enemies’ blood. Many adventures lay ahead of Draupadi and her husbands. They spent years in exile, far away from the cities to which they were accustomed. While the Pan d avas and Draupadi lived in the wilderness, she was unable to give hospitality as a queen should. So she pleaded with the goddess of abundance, and Laksmi gave Draupadi a cooking pot that could never be emptied. Although she appears as a romantic heroine in the Mahabharata, Draupadi is worshiped as a goddess in southern India, where festivals for her are held and temples erected. A major festival held near Puducherry features fire-walking in honor of Draupadi, because she was born as a result of her father’s sacrificial fire. (Dehejia; Gupta, Sakti 1991; Hiltebeitel 1988, 1999; Hiltebeitel and Erndl; Narasimhan; Pattanaik; Whitehead; Zimmer 1946)"
D uinyo The Miris of northwestern India say that this goddess or spirit of the sun can never be with her husband, the god of earth, because of their different residences. Si, the earth god, thus took a second wife, the woman Marro. All-seeing D uinyo observes everything on earth and, with the help of her husband, protects humans from danger and difficulty. (Elwin 1955 NEFA)
Durga Durga, a golden-skinned 10-armed woman, holds a spear and wears a bloodred sari. She was born during the primordial war between gods and demons, which dragged on until the gods concentrated their energies. Flames sprang from their mouths in the shape of a beautiful woman. Although produced by gods, the goddess was stronger than all of them, and she was eager to fight. The gods handed weapons to Durga, who rode a lion toward the enemy chief, Mahisa. He used his powers to assume one fearsome form after another. Still Durga  advanced until, as Mahisa assumed the form of a buffalo, the goddess slaughtered him, freeing the earth for the gods to inhabit. The goddess also had to defeat the fearsome Durga, whose name she took. Durga marched against the demon’s vast army. Durga grew a thousand arms and used them to throw flaming brands. When she reached her enemy, Durga tore herself into nine million pieces and destroyed the demon army, then strangled its leader. Other myths provide alternate versions of Durga’s birth. In one, she was the emanation of the creative force of Vishnu, summoned to protect the endangered Krishna. Then she hid herself in the womb of Krishna’s mother, Devaki, allowing herself to be killed at birth so that Krishna would live. For that, she was granted perpetual sacrifices. Although Durga’s maternal nature is rarely emphasized in myth, she was the mother of Laksmi and Sarasvati by her consort Shiva.
Durga is celebrated as part of a nine-day autumn ritual to aspects of Devi; five days are devoted to Durga. The rite is especially popular in Bengal, where a lion-mounted Durga, crafted of straw and wood, is paraded through villages and installed in her temples. Domestic rituals, using smaller images, are part of this holy period. Durga temples on the outskirts of settlements are often dedicated to Vana Durgas or ‘‘forest Durgas,’’ for Hinduism never fully assimilated these local goddesses. In Java, Durga is associated with graveyards and black magic, although she was in earlier times a beneficent goddess and protector. In Bali, as Betari Durga, she rules destruction, although in her association with Ibu Pretiwi (see Southeast Asia), she is a cosmic goddess of birth and death. In Nepal, the goddess is embodied in young girls called Kumaris (‘‘prepubescent girls’’) of whom the chief (Raj-Kumari or ‘‘royal virgin’’) emerges annually from her residence in Kathmandu to renew the state. The chief Kumari abdicates her position before she begins to menstruate, when it is believed that the goddess leaves her body. The name Kumari has been known for at least two millennia as indicating a young girl worshiped as a goddess across the Indian subcontinent. The girl embodies the goddess that is being worshiped in that setting. She was long ago absorbed into Durga and is infrequently worshiped as a separate divinity. (Allen 1975, 1976; Berk- son; Dehejia; Gupta, Sakti 1972, 1991; Harle; Ions; Kinsley 1986, 1989; McDaniel 2004; Pattanaik; Rodrigues; Santiko; Schnepel; Sharma; Whitehead; Young 1994; Zimmer 1946)
Eling-Llitung-Tune The earth goddess of the Minyong of northeastern India was made of rock. She gave birth parthenogenetically to another rock called PeddongNane, who in turn gave birth to earth’s creatures. (Elwin 1958)
Erukamma Once, Erukamma was a woman, accused of stealing children and hiding them somewhere beyond the boundaries of the village, where she would cut off their heads and eat them. After she died, she was deified so that her fearsome energies would protect rather than assault the village. The same story is told of the goddess Ha riti, who may have been a similar local goddess of earth and sky transmuted via Buddhism into the Hindu pantheon. Erukamma is a village goddess (see Gramadevata) who has become absorbed into the larger Hindu pantheon as the coastal Bengalese city of Visakhapatnam has expanded into one of the subcontinent’s most populous areas. In the case of Ellamma, her worship has spread as a result of urbanization. Originally a lower-caste goddess, she is now honored by people of all castes. Other village goddesses of the area are the protective Pydamma, credited with helping the village attract commercial investment; Durgalamma, a snake goddess who attracts wealth; Pollamma, a powerful ocean goddess who has been joined by the snake goddess Nilamma (Nilamamba) and by Kunchamma (Kunchamamba); Kanaka Durga (Kannakamma), an agricultural divinity; Maridamma, goddess of low-caste people honored in the form of a healing neem tree; and Kanaka Mahalaksmi, a goddess only worshiped in the open air. (Pintchman 2001)
Gan ga  The mother of rivers lived in heaven with her younger sister Uma . Ganga flowed three times around the heavenly city that rose on the summit of sacred Mount Meru. When sea-dwelling demons harassed the earth, the sage Agastya swallowed the ocean where they hid. Agastya got rid of the demons, but the earth was left parched and dry. Life on earth would have died, but Ganga threw herself down. Unbroken, Ganga’s power could have washed away the world, but Shiva received her torrent on his head. Thereafter the goddess, embodied in the river Ganges, made the land both fertile and sacred as she flowed across it. Part of Ganga remained in heaven as the Milky Way. Another part flowed under the earth. The intersection of the three at Benares is sacred. An important pilgrimage consists of walking the Ganges from source to sea and back again, marking shrines to the goddess along the way. At sites along the river, people wash themselves in its purifying waters. Annually, hundreds of thousands travel to avail themselves of Ganga’s promise to wash away 10 sins from each of a bather’s last 10 lives. Devout Hindus seek to die immersed in Ganga, for the goddess ensures instant freedom from both punishment and reincarnation. Ganga Dasahara, celebrated throughout India, marks the moment when the river descended from the heavens. Those unable to travel to the banks of the river bless themselves with some of her water from a vial. Calling out the goddess’s name is a powerful form of worship, rewarded with her goodwill and blessings. (Bonnefoy; Dan- ielou; Dehejia; Hawley and Wulff 1982; Ions; L. Gupta; Gupta, Sakti; Kinsley 1986; Narayan; Narasimhan; Sharma; Whitehead; Zimmer 1946.)
Gauri Before she made her reputation as a warrior, Durga was Gauri, the golden sky virgin. But sometimes Gauri is called Parvati, Shiva’s dark lover, after she underwent magical skin-lightening beauty treatments. In any case, Gauri is the name used for the goddess worshiped in August festivals. Gauri’s particular day is August’s new moon, when bedtime sweets are eaten to bring Gauri’s honeyed grace into the soul for the year. In northern India, women celebrate Gauri at an 18-day festival called Gangur.a Unmarried maidens pray for a good husband, while wives celebrate in hopes of making their unions happy. Images of the goddess are decked with flowers and grass, then plunged into water in replication of Gauri’s austerities undertaken to achieve union with the god Shiva. Her practices were so effective that Kama, god of love, shot an arrow that caused the whole world to blossom, after which Shiva fell in love with Gauri. As Gauri-Sankar, the goddess is embodied in the world’s highest peak, Mount Everest. (Danielou; Dehejia; Gupta, Sanjukta; Gupta, S akti 1991; Ions; Kinsley 1986; Jayakar; Zimmer 1946)
Ga yatri Because some rituals could not be performed without a wife to accompany the celebrant, Gayatri was installed as wife of Brahma when his first wife, Sarasvati, could not be found. Gayatri was mother of the four Vedic scriptures; her name refers to a Vedic meter. (O’Flaherty 1975; Pattanaik)
Girdoli The sacred milk-cobra was the primal entity upon which the earth rested, according to the Lohaar of central India. When the gods sought a place for the earth, they came to Girdoli’s mother-in-law, the cobra Dudh Nang, who had Girdoli’s husband gather all the old rags in the world and build a pad for Girdoli’s head, upon which the earth was placed. Girdoli still loves her husband, so every 13 years she puts the earth down so that she can make love with him. When she does, earthquakes occur. (Elwin 1949)
Goda A South Indian legend says that the girl Goda, a reincarnation or avatar of the goddess Devi, was born in the town of Srivilliputtur, south of Madurai, and intended from birth to become a bride of Krishna. She composed many lovely hymns still used in the daily rituals of Devi in that area, then disappeared into a black stone that embodied the god’s phallus. Every year her marriage to the god is celebrated in her temple, with the icon of the goddess placed on a swing like a bride. (Dehejia)
Go pis These ‘‘cowherds’’ play an important role in myths about Krishna. Because Krishna was threatened with murder were he to remain with his mother Devaki, the boy was brought up as the son of the cowherd Yasoda. As a child, he saved the Gopis when they had drunk the waters of a lake poisoned by the serpent Kaliya. Krishna wept, and his tears revived the Gopis. Later, when the Gopis were playing on the lakeshore, their ball went into the waves, and Krishna went in after it. When an evil serpent attacked, Krishna swelled up until he was a giant, saving both himself and the cowherds’ ball. Krishna grew into a charming young man with whom all the cowgirls fell in love. One day he stole their clothes while they were bathing, extracting from them a promise that they would dance with him every full moon. Thereafter, the sound of Krishna’s flute brought the Go pis to the forests, where each one felt that he was dancing with her alone. When the Go pis returned home, their husbands were unaware of their absence. When Krishna chose Ra dha  as his beloved, the other Go pis ostracized the girl, bringing about Krishna’s illness and near death. But when Radha passed a test of her loyalty, the Go pis accepted Krishna’s love for her. The story of the Go pis is enacted by dance troupes that perform the ras lila (‘‘play of love’’) in ritual settings during monsoon season. During this ritual, one woman serves as living representative of the beloved Radha. (Beswick; Dehejia; Dimmitt and van Buitenen)
Gra madevata  In addition to divinities of orthodox Hinduism, India is home to myriads of goddesses unknown outside their individual villages. The shrines of these goddesses are honored in the form of an unusual rock or large tree. These ‘‘village goddesses’’ support communal well-being by protecting against infectious disease, by regulating rainfall, by providing abundant crops, and by bestowing children. They are also the guardians of village boundaries that they keep safe from aggressors. Their simple festivals honor the abundance of the earth and the goddess who provides it. In the south, the name Amman (‘‘lady’’ or ‘‘mistress,’’ a root word found in Mariyamman and similar names) indicates that the goddess is a Gramadevata. When a village grows into a city, its matron goddess grows in stature. Myths describe the goddess as the reason for the city’s foundation. At times, the city goddess is the ancestral divinity of the ruler’s family. Such a goddess is Danteshvari, goddess of the region around Jagdalpur in Orissa. Although the ruler was an invader who conquered the indigenous tribal people, they did not discontinue their own village goddess worship, instead simply adopting the new name. Meanwhile old regional goddesses were assimilated to the newcomer by being declared her 32 sisters. Although these goddesses are technically Hindu, they are non-Vedic and have little connection with Vedic divinities. Most do not appear in textual sources; they are known through prayer and practice in their immediate localities. (Crooke; Dehejia; Foulston; Jayakar; Sharma; Whitehead)
Halia The lightning goddess of the Bugun of northeastern India is a young girl who constantly attempts to avoid being assaulted by her brother. She hides in the clouds, but he finds her whenever she has to wash her hair, which falls down and turns the sky black. When he sneaks up on her, she pulls out a silver hairpin that flashes as lightning. He runs away, making the sound of thunder. When Halia drops the hairpin, it strikes trees and burns them up. (Elwin 1958)
Hanai The sun goddess of the Buguns and Khowas of northwestern India was Hanai, whose husband was the moon, Habia. Their daughter was Lomi and their son, Jomi. When the children conceived an incestuous love for each other and conceived a child, they ran away out of terror at what their mother would do. Lomi gave birth in the sky, then threw the monstrous child down to earth, where it still lives on an oceanic rock. (Elwin 1955 NEFA)
Hariti In an early incarnation, this figure was a human woman who suffered a miscarriage and vowed to take revenge on the townspeople she blamed for her misfortune. So she was reborn as an ogress who had 500 children whom she loved passionately. When the Buddha hid one of her children until she accepted his faith, she converted and, in the process, became tenderhearted toward women who had lost children. (Pintchman 2001; Shaw 2006; Young 2004)
Hathay In Paranganad in South India, this goddess (‘‘grandmother’’) was originally a girl who refused to marry the man selected for her. She drowned herself in the pool in the center of the village. When she appeared to people in dreams, announcing that she had been an incarnation of Pa rvati, her worship was assured. (Gupta, Sanjukta; Whitehead)
Holika The demon queen Holika is worshiped in one of India’s major national holidays, Holi, which marks winter’s end. She was originally a princess who bathed in fire every day, but one day her magic disappeared, and Holika burned up. Another story says Holika was a demon of fire who attempted to kill the young Krishna by offering him her breasts, but he sucked so hard that he killed her. Her myth is reenacted in the burning of an effigy decorated with cow dung by dancing women. Small household fires clear away piles of discards from spring-cleaning. (Gupta, Sakti 1991; Patton)
Ila Apparently a very ancient name for the Indian earth goddess, Ila appears in contradictory stories that leave unanswered questions about her original identity and form. Some stories call her male, or say that she changed sex several times. In the Rg Veda, Ila was the goddess-progenitrix of humanity who invented food and milk to feed her children. When invoked, she is often mentioned together with lesser known earth goddesses, Bharati, Mahi, and Hotra. (Dimmitt and van Buitenen; Kinsley 1986)
Indra n i Indra, the tempestuous storm god, raped Indran i (‘‘divine grace’’), who became his consort and bore three sons. One of her names, Saci, denotes ‘‘power,’’ from which this goddess has been interpreted as her consort’s personified might. (Ions; Pintchman 1994)
Ja nguli This three-mouthed, six-handed golden Buddhist snake goddess is shown holding a sword, a thunderbolt, and an arrow with her right hands, while her left holds a noose, a blue lotus, and a bow. She was invoked as a protector against poisonous snakes. Because Buddhism did not permit killing such creatures, magical invocations to Ja nguli (‘‘snake charmer’’) were popular among those fearing snakebite. She was herself a snake goddess, one of a type common in India (see Manasa). (Shaw 2006)
Jayamala At the foot of the Bhutan hills, Jayamala and her husband, the priest Jayanath, lived frugally but happily together—or so thought Jayamala. But her husband had a streak of greediness. When he was offered the chance for a second wife, the only daughter of a wealthy man, he succumbed to that greed. No sooner had the new wife moved in, but she built a rich new home for herself and husband, barring Jayamala from entering or from seeing their husband. Only once each day, when she brought water from the river, would Jayamala see the man she had loved. Then she would sit by the river and weep, making the waters salty with her tears. It was this salt that the king of elephants tasted, a taste that led him to find the lovely abandoned wife. He proposed marriage to her but Jayamala was true to her first love, until a wave rushed in behind them, tearing down the palace the rich girl had built and carrying away all its occupants. With that, Jayamala went willingly into the land of elephants, where a waterfall of magic colors turned her into a queen elephant. Since that time, legend says, all elephant herds are headed by a queen in honor of Jayamala. (Pakrasi)
Jyestha Jyestha is rarely worshiped now, but this was not the case during the 7th and 8th centuries CE  when she was an extraordinarily popular divinity. Early images show her as a stout woman with firm breasts and an abundant belly. She stands in a relaxed posture, holding out a lotus flower and a water-pot, making a protective gesture. She wears an elaborate hairstyle and fine jewelry. Crows surround her, as do small children. Born when the cosmic ocean was churned, sister of Laksmi (thus sometimes identified as Alaksmi), Jyestha was dark and unattractive, with breasts that hung to her huge stomach. She married a hermit, who was not a good husband. When he abandoned her, the gods decreed that she would be supported by women’s offerings and that she should appear whenever married couples argued. (Kinsley 1997; Leslie)
Kadru  One-eyed Kadru was born at the beginning of time, when Shatarupa divided herself into 13 parts. Best known as the mother of Manasa, Kadru wagered with her sister Vinata about who could see farthest. But she attempted to cheat and, as a result, forfeited one of her eyes. Kadru prayed to become the mother of 1,000 snakes, while her sister prayed for two children more powerful than all her sister’s. Kadru laid a thousand eggs, Vinata two. For 500 years they rested together in a jar of water. Then Kadru's eggs hatched into 1,000 snakes. Anxious, Vinata broke open one of her own eggs to see if anything was alive. She found a son, but the lower half of his body was malformed from hatching too early. He cursed his mother to serve her sister for another 500 years, at the end of which time the second egg hatched into the giant snake-eating bird Garuda, who avenged his mother by eating Kadru's offspring. (Dange; Kinsley 1986; Pattanaik; Zimmer 1955)
Ka Iam With her sister Ka Ngot, these water divinities of the Khasi people of Assam had a race in which they took on the forms of the rivers Uniam and Umngot, each river reflecting the personality of the girl who submerged herself into it. Umngot took an easy path and slid slowly along while Umiam made her way energetically through ravines and gorges. Despite her slow progress Umngot won, reaching the coast and spreading out into a lovely semicircle. When she arrived, Umiam was shamed by her loss and broke into five small rivers. (Pakrasi)
Kaikeyi Passionate and beautiful, this warrior wife joined her kingly husband in battle. One day, she saw his chariot wheel about to fly off. So she put her thumb into the bolt-hold and held the chariot steady despite intense pain. When he learned how her effort had saved him, the king promised her two gifts, which she said she would choose later. Many years passed before she claimed her boon: that he pass over his oldest son by another woman to crown her own son king. The king was forced to comply, leading to the exile of his favored son Rama, the consort of Sita. When the king died of a broken heart, Kaikeyi blamed herself. Her son also blamed her, never referring to her as his mother again. (Narayan; Pattanaik)
Kaitab Among the Raja Muria of central India, this was the name of the earth’s mother. In order for the earth to be born, men stoned Kaitab to death. From her flesh the earth was formed, from her bones the rocks. (Elwin 1949)
Kali Her tongue juts out of her black face. Her four hands hold weapons. Her necklace and earrings are strung with dismembered bodies. Kali wears snakes all about her body, writhing on her head and around her neck. She was born at time’s beginning, manifesting herself when the demon Daruka threatened the gods. Parvati entered the body of Shiva and gathered poison stored in his throat, bursting forth as three-eyed Kali, armed with a trident. This emanation dispatched the demon, but her battle-fury was uncontained, and Kali threatened the world until Shiva restrained her. Stories of Kali as a demon-destroyer connect her with Durga, as does her name Chamunda (see Matrikas), formed from demons Chanda and Munda, whom she killed. Several myths speak of Kali’s uncontrollable energy. Once, Kali and Shiva danced together, growing more competitive, until it seemed the world would shake to pieces; and so it will, for beneath appearances that dance continues. Another time, Kali killed two demons, which required that she strip because they were invulnerable to all but a naked woman. This enraged her, so she killed them, then celebrated her victory by draining their blood. Her wrath unappeased, Kali danced wildly, until she realized that Shiva was underneath her. The god’s tactic slowed Kali’s wildness, but only for the moment, for she will resume the dance that ends the world. During the world’s first age, the Satya Yuga, Kali lived together with Shiva. Shiva abandoned Kali but could not escape her, for wherever he turned, one of her forms appeared, teaching him that Kali is all-pervasive and inescapable. So he returned to her and together they watched the four eras unfold. By Hindu calculations, we are currently enduring the age of Kali, the 432,000-year-long Kali Yuga, which began on Friday, February 18, 3102 BCE. Creation’s final stage before its destruction and rebirth, the Kali Yuga is a period when kings lack tranquility, women and cows are recklessly killed, and money is the basis for nobility. After this desperate age, humanity will be destroyed after a 100-year drought followed by fire and flood, until the entire universe dissolves into Prakrti. Then the cycle of creation will begin again. Several attributes are important in Kali’s iconography: her blackness, her jutting tongue, and her wild, snake-like hair. Kali is described as the cast-off black skin of Parvati, who underwent austerities to gain feminine beauty that would attract Shiva. After she had purified herself, her skin whitened, with its blackness consolidating itself as Kali. The myth, which refers to attitudes towards skin color in caste-conscious India, may point to an indigenous or non-Indo-European origin for the goddess. Another myth describes Kali as having a pockmarked face, connecting her with Sitala. The rest of her body is unmarked, because her brother licked her all over to remove the scars, but modesty forbade him from licking his sister’s face. Images show Kali with tongue distended. Often her lips are bright red, suggesting that she has been drinking blood. Some texts say that the gesture indicates Kali’s sudden mortification at finding herself dancing on her consort, Shiva, but it is more likely that the tongue indicates sexuality and/or consumption of forbidden foods, with which Kali is connected. Images also emphasize Kali’s wild, disheveled hair. Well-dressed hair is an important part of the Hindu woman’s self-presentation, so Kali’s hairdressing (or lack thereof) breaks social norms and taboos. It also connects her to the forbidden parts of women’s lives, for they traditionally unbound their hair when ‘‘polluted’’ by menstruation or death. Although her maternal nature is not clearly evident from her iconography, the goddess is known as Kali-Ma, ‘‘mother Kali.’’ Bloodthirsty Kali grows tenderhearted toward anyone who adores her as mother. Such a vision of Kali animated the work of Indian poets Ramprasad and Ramakrishna. In addition, the kindly side of the goddess was visible to devotees in the Albanian Catholic nun, Mother Teresa, who was seen as an avatar of the goddess. Kali is one of India’s most popular goddesses, second only to abundance-granting Laksmi. Her picture hangs in many homes; her name is familiar in Calcutta, home to the temple where her skull is kept. Preeminent among Tantric divinities, Kali is primary in both rightand left-handed paths, but is especially important in the latter, for she represents the fearful and the forbidden. Dancing in cemeteries, drinking blood, she shows the way to enlightenment through confronting fear and death. (Beane; Caldwell; Dehejia; Danielou; Dimmitt and van Buitenen; Gombrich and Obeyesekere; Gupta, Sanjukta; Hixon; Ions; Kinsley 1975; Hawley and Wulff 1996; Kripal; McDermott; McDaniel 2004; McDermott and Kripal; Larson et al.; Mookerjee; Pintchman 2001; R. Sen; Thadani; Whitehead; Zimmer 1946)
Kamadhenu This name is commonly used of the sacred cow that symbolizes prosperity in India (see Laksmi). She is also called Sabala and Kapila, depending on whether she is spotted or reddish. In Sanskrit, the words ‘‘cow’’ and ‘‘earth’’ are synonyms, indicating the connection between this figure and the earth goddess. As a divine ‘‘wish-cow’’ or granter of abundance, she was born of Surabhi (‘‘fragrance’’) and was the mother of the bull who accompanied the wild god Shiva. (Bonnefoy; Danielou; Gupta, Sanjukta; Zimmer 1946)
Kama-Kala Goddess of sexuality, Kama-Kala is depicted as a series of three dots or circles representing erotic parts of the female body, the breasts and mouth. (Jayakar)
Kamakhsya Among the Koch people of central Assam, this was the name of the high goddess, a form of the great Durga . She appeared in her temple annually in human form, as a naked girl who danced all night. One night when she was dancing, the king fell in love with her. She agreed to marry him, but required that he build stairs into her temple from the valley below, the entire project to be completed in one night. The workers came close to finishing, but a cock crowed just before dawn, saving the goddess from marriage to a human. The king then attempted to rape her, after which the goddess cursed him and his family and disappeared into her statue, never to return in the form of a living woman again. Another version of her legend has it that the tribal Garos people were driven out of their original homeland by invading forces. A woman named Nunui Nanokhi (Noini Mechik) carried with her an image of their ancestral goddess, Phojou. When the woman set down the image of the goddess, it refused to move again. Realizing that this was the place the goddess had selected as her own, the people built a shrine to her and changed her name to Kamakhya. (Ghosh and Ghosh; Pakrasi)
Ka Nam Among the Khasis (Hynniew trep), an ethnic group in northern India and Bangladesh, the girl Ka Nam was born, so beautiful that her mother feared that she would be kidnapped. So she imprisoned the child in a secluded part of the village. The girl’s father finally convinced his wife that their child should lead a more normal life, which was to prove her undoing. One day, as Ka Nam was drawing water from a well, a huge tiger dragged her off to its lair. The tiger, U Khla, was very hungry. When he realized what a tiny morsel the "girl was, he decided to fatten her up. He brought her little candies and made her feel at home. Ka Nam forgot to be afraid and grew into a young woman with perfect trust in tigers. Her host, however, had not lost sight of his objective in rearing the girl. When Ka Nam had reached full growth, U Khla invited all his tiger friends for a feast. But a little mouse warned Ka Nam and she ran away, following the mouse’s directions to the cave of the magician toad U Hynroh. He said he would protect her, but in fact he only intended to make her a slave. Telling her he was going to make sure she would be safe from the tiger, he turned her into a truly hideous toad. The tiger, returning to his den, found his captive had escaped. He grew furious and called down curses on whoever had stolen his prey. The other tigers, when they realized they wouldn’t get anything to eat, turned on U Khla and tore him to death. Meanwhile, back at U Hynroh’s cave, the little mouse had witnessed Ka Nam’s transformation. Taking pity on the girl, she led Ka Nam to a magical tree that led to the sky. The maiden climbed into the tree and spoke the mouse’s magic words: ‘‘Grow tall, dear tree, the sky is near, expand and grow.’’ The tree grew and grew until it reached the sky, and there the maiden entered the Blue Realm. Ka Nam, looking like a toad, went from palace to palace begging for help, but the heavenly folk were so repulsed by her ugliness that they threw her out. Finally she approached the palace of Ka Sgni, the sun mother, who gave her an outhouse to live in. There she sat one day, toadskin off, combing her hair. And there the son of Ka Sgni saw her and fell in love with her. He ran to his mother and asked her to move the maiden indoors so he could be near her. Ka Sgni, a wise mother, waited to see if the infatuation would pass. She also went out to spy on the toad in the outhouse and, sure enough, saw the maiden without her toad disguise, shining with loveliness. Realizing that the maiden had been bewitched, Ka Sgni knew she would have to find the maiden asleep, and then burn the toadskin. She did so, releasing the maiden but incurring the fury of the magician toad. For days he tried to devour Ka Sgni, causing the world’s first eclipse. Below on earth, the people stood in fear, watching the goddess fighting for her life. They screamed and they cried, they beat on drums and cymbals. When he heard the commotion, U Hynroh thought an army was about to advance on him. He released the sun goddess but continues to attack her periodically, hoping humans will be too busy to help. For this reason, the Khasis say, it is important always to make a lot of noise during an eclipse. (Pakrasi)"
Kansa Nagin The salt goddess of the Chikanput people of Orissa came from the underworld, where she lived with her mother, the ancestral goddess Dhuli Nagin. When the time came to marry, the girl cleansed herself using turmeric and river sand. The dirt from her bath was carried away by cobra-girls and hidden where neither men nor cattle could find it. But somehow a rat found its way to the hidden dirt and carried it up to the world of men, where it was found to be tasty. This was the world’s first salt. (Elwin 1954)
Kantarupi In the city of Mysore, the goddess Bisal-Mariamna and her six sisters stole the husband of a young woman, Kantarupi, for their pleasure. They held him captive, but after growing weary of him, decided to let him return briefly to his wife. Mischievously, they hypnotized Kantarupi, so that she was ignorant of the night they spent together. A few months later the apparent widow, Kantarupi, realized she was pregnant but could not explain how. Certain that she’d been unfaithful with a secret lover, Kantarupi’s father cast her out into the woods. There a prostitute adopted her and exposed the baby boy in a snake temple, where his grandfather found him and raised him. Kantarupi, having no other recourse for keeping herself alive, joined her hostess in prostitution. Years later, the now-grown son passed through the prostitute’s quarters and, seeing Kantarupi, fell in love and arranged a meeting. But on the way there, he stumbled over a calf whose mother soothed him by saying, ‘‘What can you expect of someone about to sleep with his own mother?’’ The young man was baffled. He was even more baffled when he approached Kantarupi, and all the mother’s milk she had never given him to drink exploded from her breasts at once. All ended happily, however, when BisalMariamna released the stolen husband, and the little family was reunited. (Shulman)
Karni This minor goddess was said to have asked the god of death, Yama, to restore a poor woman’s son to life. When Yama refused, Karni vowed that none of her devotees would ever die. When they pass from this life, they are reborn as the mice that live in her temple in Rajasthan. When the mice die, they are reborn as Karni’s devotees. (Pattanaik)
Ka Sgni The sun goddess of the Khasis lived on earth with two sisters, Ka Um (water) and Ka Ding (fire) as well as their brother U Bynai, the moon. U Bynai was as bright as Ka Sgni. But he was a spoiled and self-centered young man who spent many nights away from home, drinking and gambling. Then he began to desire his sister. When she realized what he was planning, she grew furious. Scorching his face with ashes, she refused to consort with him. U Bynai was so ashamed that he left home to wander through the heavens. His sisters stayed home with their mother until she died. Then they formed the earth from her body. Another story says that the civet cat, U Kui, cut the line that held earth and heaven together. Those below were plunged into darkness because the sun hid in shame over her brother’s propositions. Many animals went in search of the sun—the elephant, the horse, the rhinoceros, the buffalo—but none could find her. Finally, the cock saved the day, by convincing the divinity who removes the curse of incestuous love to do so for the sun goddess. Then he crowed three times, and the sun goddess reappeared. (Rafy)
Kayum In the Indian northeast, this great ancestral mother plays little part in human history except to give birth to important beings including the earth goddess Sedi. She is honored in genealogical songs but has little religious role. (Elwin 1955 NEFA)
Khupning-Knam Born of clouds and mist, this primal woman of the Singpho floated in primeval mist until she gave birth to snow-children, a boy and a girl. Because they had no one else to marry, they married each other and produced the earth goddess Inga and the sky god Mu. At first the earth was only mud and the sky was only cloud, but the siblings’ son, the wind god Imbung, blew so hard that Inga dried up and Mu flew upward. (Elwin 1958)
Klu-mo Part of the tradition of Bon, the religion which preceded Buddhism in Tibet, Klu-mo was the first being to emerge from the void of creation. From the top of her head, the sky erupted. Then the moon burst from her right eye, the sun from her left, and the stars from her teeth. Her voice created thunder and her tongue lightning. Her breath formed the clouds, her tears the rain. Her flesh formed the earth, and the rivers that run across it are her veins. When her eyes open, it is day; when she closes them to sleep, night descends. (Bonnefoy)
Kotavi Wild and naked Kotavi appears on battlefields where she opposes the forces of the gods while protecting her demon offspring. A similar goddess, found in South India and called Korravai, haunts battlefields and grants victory to her favorites. She is shown nude, with deranged hair. Sometimes armor covers her upper body. She was a special goddess of the women drummers who accompanied warriors into battle. (Caldwell; Kinsley 1986, 1997; Pattanaik)
Kubja This hunchbacked girl worked as a masseuse, for despite the twist in her spine she was strong and agile. She was beautiful, too, although her deformity kept people from realizing that. Nonetheless she attained renown for the oils she mixed and applied. One day, she met Krishna and, smitten with love for the handsome god, gave him some of her unguents. This so pleased Krishna that he picked her up and, hanging her for a few moments like a fish on a scale, straightened her spine and made her into a desirable woman. (Dimmitt and van Buitenen)
Kuhrami Among the Maria of central India, this primal woman was set afloat in a gourd with her brother. When the gourd ran aground on a rock, the couple found no food or water, and the earth was so hot that it burned their feet. But when the high god sent animal messengers to check on the children, they replied that the boy and girl were fine, because the animals wanted to eat them. Finally a monkey told the truth, and the high god sent help so that they were able to plant and harvest. But they could not reproduce, because they were sister and brother. So Budi Matal, the mother goddess, inflicted smallpox upon them, so that they became too scarred to recognize each other. From them, all the people of the region descend. (Elwin 1949)
Kujum-Chantu The Apa Tanis say this giant woman formed the earth when, noticing that creatures were walking about on her fat stomach and realizing that if she rose they would fall to their deaths, willed herself to die. Her body turned into the earth, with the soil being richer where she was fattest; her eyes became the sun and moon. (Elwin 1958)
Kundalini Devi A goddess who incarnates herself within human bodies, Kundalini Devi lives for union with her consort, Shiva, brought about by yogic practices.
Kundalini Devi lives in the lowest of 10 chakras, where she appears as a snake coiled around a lingam with her head resting on its top. Through discipline, the snake can be encouraged to unwind herself and stretch up the entire spinal cord, bringing illumination. (McDaniel 2004)
Kunti An ancient mother goddess, Kunti was the ever-virginal lover of the gods. Although replaced in Hindu worship by later goddesses, Kunti figured in the epic Maha bharata as a king’s daughter so devout that a sage gave her a magic formula to seduce any god. Kunti had a son by the sun god but, because she was unmarried, cast the child away. Found by a charioteer, he was raised as such, but his kingly nature kept appearing, so that he led a miserable, confused life. Later, Kunti bore the husbands of polyandrous Draupadi by several gods. Kunti is honored with a fair in north India, where a temple is dedicated to her. (Danielou; Gupta, Sakti 1991; Hawley and Wulff 1996; Narasimhan; Pattanaik)
Kurumba Celebrated at the popular Cock Festival in central Kerala, Kurumba is honored by the singing of sexual songs and the ceremonial pollution of her shrine when a lower-caste man circumambulates it. Possessed men dance and cut themselves with swords as they utter oracles from the goddess, and chickens are offered to the goddess, who keeps the region free from smallpox and other afflictions. As the festival site has Jain connections, Kurumba has been described as a form of the Jaina goddess Kannaki, as her name is etymologically connected with the word for ‘‘anklet,’’ the most important symbol of that goddess. (Gentes)
Laksmi India’s most popular goddess, golden-skinned Laksmi represents abundance and wealth, not only in the form of money but also children, jewelry, and cows. She is the primary goddess of the home, honored with flowers, leaves, and vines. Peacocks and elephants also draw her approving eye. Early myths describe Laksmi floating before creation in the milk ocean. Later myths describe Laksmi as rising from the ocean when churned by the gods, covered with necklaces and pearls, crowned and braceleted. Every god wanted her as wife, but she preferred Vishnu, being reborn with him in several incarnations. She was Padma or Kamala when he was the dwarf Vamana; she was Dharani, the earth, when he was Parasurama; she was faithful Sita when he was Rama. Finally, when Vishnu was born as Krishna, Laksmi accompanied him as the cowgirl Ra dha , and later as his wife Rukmini. Once Vishnu cursed Laksmi and turned her into a mare, in which form she lived in the underworld. There she centered her mind on the wild god Shiva. After thousands of years, the god was moved by her austerities and came to her, riding on a bull. When he asked her why she prayed to him, rather than to Vishnu, she revealed that she knew their secret: that they were the same divinity. Impressed by her awareness, Shiva predicted that Vishnu would reunite with her. The prediction came true when Vishnu arrived in the form of a stallion. Many interpreters suggest that Laksmi was preeminent in pre-Vedic India as goddess of the earth and its fructifying moisture; she was incorporated into Vedic "theology when her worshipers would not abandon their devotion to her. Once estab- lished, Laksmi grew to symbolize the wealth of the soul, becoming a symbol of spiritual prosperity. Laksmi’s other name is Sri, ‘‘great one,’’ under which name she is associated with both the lotus (symbol of enlightenment and fecundity) and the elephant (rain and royal power). Hindu reverence for cows is based on worship of Laksmi. Hinduism defines male godhead as passive unless activated by the goddess, so Vishnu’s power to enrich life only functions when Laksmi inspires it. Therefore it is thought good policy to revere embodiments of wealth—cows, which are called ‘‘Laksmi’’ after the goddess. At the festival of Pongal, cows’ horns are painted brightly, their necks garlanded with flowers, and their food specially prepared. The festival draws its name from the raisin-filled rice fed to cattle on that day. Rice is another important embodiment of Laksmi, used to create wall paintings (chita) in honor of the goddess. In Orissa, during the Kaumuni-pu rnima  festival, women invoke the goddess in a mound of grain and tell how she once disappeared, taking the world’s food with her. Her connection with rice led to her adoption in Bali and Java as the goddess Dewi Shri (see Southeast Asia). As  an  embodiment  of  the  goddess’s  reproductive  power,  brides  are  called ‘‘Laksmi’’ during their wedding festivities. At the goddess’s puja (festival) in Tamil Nadu, the goddess is honored as goddess of happily married women, because of the myth that Laksmi honored the god Shiva with a daily offering of a thousand lotus buds. When, one day, she found herself short two buds, she began to cut off her breasts because Vishnu compared them to lotus buds. Shiva, stopping the sacrifice when she had only cut off one breast, turned it into the sacred bael tree, under which he thereafter lived. Although Laksmi is known as a consort goddess, she appears as the dominant partner in some myths. In Puri, she was said to roam the countryside alone, checking into the homes of her worshipers to see that they were performing rituals correctly. She found that they were sloppy in their worship, except for one outcaste woman who created a perfect ritual. Laksmi accepted food from the woman, but when she returned, her consort and his brother said that she was ritually polluted. The goddess cursed them to wander for a dozen years until they were offered food by a dalit (‘‘untouchable’’), who would be Laksmi in disguise. Many festivals are dedicated to Laksmi, the most important being Divali, the festival of wealth and light. During Divali, lamps are lighted to attract Laksmi’s bounty. She is drawn to the best-lit homes and spurns dim ones, while her sister Alaksmi prefers to visit dirty places. Devotees also offer Laksmi silver coins and light fireworks in her honor; they leave windows open all night, so the goddess has easy access. Businesspeople put their account books on an altar to Laksmi. Laksmi is the supreme divinity and object of worship in the sect called Pancaratra Tantra, whose practitioners have developed many esoteric rites and yogas centering on the goddess. (Atkinson et al.; Danielou; Dimmitt and van Buitenen; Gupta, Sakti; Gupta, Sanjukta; Hamilton; Haw- ley and Wulff 1982; Ions; Kinsley 1986, 1989; Kumar; Leslie; Pattanaik; Sharma; Shaw 2006; Warrier; Young 1994; Zimmer 1946)"
Lalita A form of Devi or of Tripurasundari, Lalita represents universal consciousness embodied as a desirable and desiring young woman. (Brooks; Gupta, Sanjukta)
Lha-Mo Tibetan Lha-Mo is the supreme guardian of Tibet and of the Dalai Lamas, protecting the land and its Buddhist believers. She is depicted as enveloped in flame, riding across a lake of blood. She was so fierce that when her son refused to convert to Buddhism, she killed him and made a saddle blanket for her mule from his skin. Her companions are goddesses of the seasons and the five goddesses of long life, and innumerable fierce female spirits who inhabit the Tibetan landscape. (Dehejia, 250– 251; Shaw 2006)
Madhighariani Goddess of the city of Rayagada in Orissa, Madhighariani is honored in the form of six small white stones and one large one painted in the form of Madhighariani’s head, with huge dark eyes and a golden mouth with protruding silver tongue. Assimilated to Durga, Madhighariani (‘‘in the middle of the fort’’) was originally a tribal goddess later patronized by the region’s kings. A similar goddess, Markama, was the Gra madevata  of the village of Bissamcuttack, adopted by local rulers. She was worshiped in the shape of a red-painted stone that represented her head, while an unpainted stone nearby represented her body. (Schnepel)
Mahi Goddess of the river that bears her name in the state of Gujarat, Mahi was a headstrong girl. She wanted to marry the sea, but her father refused to approve the match. So she set out alone from home to reach her goal. Wandering west, she found jungles filled with tigers. So she turned east, crossing rocky regions until, exhausted and spent, she reached her objective. But the sea, seeing the dark-skinned woman, rejected her. Furious, she returned home and raised an army of stones, with which she assailed the sea. Overwhelmed by her strength and power, the sea married her, burying the stony army at their point of union. (Beck et al.)
Mahisi Three goddesses incarnated together as the voluptuous and seductive Lila, while three gods incarnated together as her spouse. When the gods grew tired of life’s challenges and wanted to enter a hermitage, Lila was not satisfied to go without intimacy for the rest of her life. For this, the triple goddess was cursed to be reborn as a demon, Mahisi. Sister of the demon Mahisa destroyed by Durga, Mahisi engaged in austerities in order to gain spiritual power over the gods. She grew so powerful that she received a blessing from Brahma that no one born of a man and a woman could kill her. But the god Vishnu incarnated as a temptress, the Apsara Mohini, and seduced the god Shiva, giving birth to the sage Ayyappa. He was so pure that he resisted gorgeous Lila, reborn once again from the ashes of the demon-queen. So she took the form of a goddess Malikapuruthamma, who in turn may be the same as the goddess Kadhiravati, goddess of the acacia tree. (Subramaniam)
Mainakini Once this princess of Sinhala saw a spirit, flying across the sky, lose his garments in the wind. As a result, she could see how small his penis was, and she laughed. In punishment, he stranded her in an all-women’s land where she could not become pregnant. The women, desiring offspring, prayed to Devi. Although she could not break the curse, the goddess arranged that a god would stand just beyond the limits of the women’s world and sing, causing the women to conceive. When a celibate monk was sent to live among the women, he spent many years pleasuring the women and forgetting his spiritual disciplines. After decades, a student of the yogi happened along and brought the sage back to the outer world and yogic practice. (Pattanaik)
Manasa The worship of Manasa, daughter of Kadru , remains strong in Bengal, where she is honored as a goddess of prosperity and a protector against snakebite. Her connection to wealth may derive from the reemergence of snakes at the beginning of the growing season. She has the power to bring the dead back to life, as snakes apparently revivify when they shed their skin. Manasa emerged when Shiva, meditating by a pond, saw a lotus blossom. This caused him to become aroused, and he ejaculated. His semen slithered down the stalks of the plant until it reached the king of the nagas (snake-people), whose mother fashioned the seed into a beautiful goddess of snakes and poisons. She rise to the surface where Shiva sat, frightening him. He called for help in eradicating the snakes, but lovely Manasa pleaded for them. Struck by her beauty, Shiva attempted to make love to her, but she refused him, reminding him that she was his daughter. She did agree to go home with him, for which purpose she turned herself into a spider and hid among the lotus flowers. But Shiva’s wife Candi rejected Manasa and, believing her to be Shiva’s mistress, put out Manasa’s eye with a hot poker. Her remaining eye flung out poison, and Candi fell down dead. After Shiva pleaded for Manasa to return his wife to life, Manasa restored her. Manasa also saved Shiva’s life after he had drunk poison produced by the churning of the cosmic sea. Because she had power over poisons, she was called upon to save her father. But she demurred because she was naked except for a tiger skin and could not appear before the gods. Candi gave Manasa some rags to wear and, insulted, Manasa struck her dead. But she went to the dying Shiva and sucked out all the poisons, half of which she shared with snakes and scorpions, the other half of which she kept in her single eye. Again, upon Shiva’s request, she revived the dead Candi. As part of his fatherly duties, Shiva had to find a husband for his fierce daughter, and he married her to a sage, by whom she had a son. Then she decided humans should worship her. The first people she encountered were cowherds who beat her bloody. She set her snakes upon them, but they still did not acknowledge her divinity. She milked a cow into a leaky basket and, turning it upside down, sipped milk from it, but this did not impress the cowherds. So she made their cattle disappear and refused to return them until they had agreed to festivals in her honor. As she traveled across India, she had many such encounters with people who, refusing to worship her, were brought into her devotion through threats of death and loss of livelihood. In Bengal, a man refused to honor her, so Manasa killed each of his sons in turn. Finally only Lakhindar, husband-to-be of Behula, was left, and he was cursed to die on his wedding night. All local people knew the curse, so no girl would wed Lakhindar. But Behula  came from a distant town and did not know her likely fate as a despised widow. Lakhindar’s father tried to thwart the goddess by building a snake-proof iron house, but Manasa threatened the architect, who left a small opening. Soon Lakhindar was no more. Behula would not leave the corpse, launching it onto the river with the intention of confronting the goddess. Behula found her way to the hall of heaven, where she presented evidence against Manasa, who was ordered to restore Lakhindar’s life. Through dancing, Behula gained back the lives of her brothers-in-law, returning to the family as a heroine. Manasa’s most important festival is Naga-pachami, during monsoon season. On that day, the race of serpents that includes the Na ginis was said to have been born. As the rainy season forces serpents from underground hiding places, pots of milk are put out for them to feed upon, in hopes of deterring them from biting people. (Danielou; Dehejia; Gupta, Sanjukta; Ions; Kinsley 1986; McDaniel 2004; Sharma)
Manodari One of India’s smallpox goddesses comes from the region around Malabar. Once she was the wife of a demon whom Kali was sent to kill. In an attempt to save her husband, Manodari began a series of extreme austerities that finally forced Shiva to give her a boon. He told her that her sweat would thereafter be extraordinarily powerful. So when Manodari met Kali, returning triumphant from killing her husband, she hit the goddess with beads of her sweat, which turned into the pimples. As Kali lay, excruciatingly ill, Shiva grew angry at this use of his boon, and his anger formed into a hero who licked Kali all over to remove the pox. But when he came to her face, he demurred out of modesty, for he was her brother and could not lick her face, so the otherwise-lovely goddess has visible pockmarks. The revived Kali sent for Manodari and had her arms and legs cut off, forcing her to serve thereafter as a figure to whom people pray under the name Vasu rimala (‘‘garland of poxes’’) for relief from the disease. (Aiyappan)
Mari Although women are devoted to this goddess, she is served by transvestite priests called potara ja. Legend has it that a lower-caste man, in love with a highercaste woman, had to bury her when she suddenly died, because her family would have nothing to do with the process. In his grief he dressed in her clothing and ran through the town, invoking her as the goddess Laksmi. Another story says that the goddess, then called A dimai, granted the boon of a son to a good but barren man, but demanded that the son be always dressed in girls’, then later women’s, clothing. The goddess has both benevolent and dangerous aspects, the latter connected (see also Sitala) with the affliction of smallpox. As such, she can appear either as a beautiful healthy woman or as an impoverished pox-ridden one with mad eyes. It is likely this goddess is a local version of Mariyamman. (Vetschera)
Ma rici Buddhist goddess of dawn, invoked as the sun rises, Marici was typically depicted with three heads, at least one of which is a wild boar. She is also shown in a chariot drawn by seven wild boars. She is a protective divinity, endowing her worshipers with assurance that thieves and enemies cannot harm them. As such, she is sometimes depicted as a warrior. Marici was masculinized into a god in China and Japan. (Dehejia; Shaw 2006)
Mariyamman This smallpox goddess is honored in southern India, where her temples must be built far from residences. Pox is understood as a visitation from the goddess and as a reminder of the importance of maintaining devotion to her. Now that smallpox is rare due to inoculations, the goddess functions as a maternal goddess who both loves and disciplines her children. Her images show her as a fierce weapon-wielding goddess. The goddess was originally a girl of the Brahmin class who was courted by a disguised dalit. Furious at being tricked, she killed herself and, becoming a goddess, burned the dalit alive. Another story says that she was a pure wife, so chaste that she could boil water on her head. But she encountered two people making love and, feeling envy, lost her miraculous powers. Her husband, suspecting that she had been impure, had her beheaded. When she was restored to life, her body was mixed up with that of another woman, creating a half-Brahmin, half-outcaste goddess. Mariyamman has been connected with the Matrikas, who both inflict and heal disease. Her preferred offering is human hair, so her devotees shave their heads. She regularly possesses her followers (usually male) in ecstatic worship, provided they are chaste and strictly vegetarian. (Kapadia; Kinsley 1986; Pintchman 2001; Younger)
Matrikas The ‘‘seven mothers’’ may descend from the ancient Indus Valley civilization, for sculptures of seven goddesses have been found from Mohenjo-daro. In Hinduism, the Matrikas are said to have been the empowering consorts of important gods: Brahmani (female aspect of Brahma), Mahesvarˆi (Shiva), Kaumari (Skanda), Vaisnaviˆ (Vishnu), sow-faced Varahi (Varaha-Vishnu), Indran i (Indra), and skeletal Camun da (with no consort, a form of Devi sometimes called Kalika). Their worship is common throughout India, especially in Orissa. Honored with life-sized images, they may have their own temples or be lodged in those of other divinities. Occasionally a temple is devoted to a single Matrika, commonly Vraa  hi or Camun d a. The latter is found in Nepal, where frightening images of an emaciated goddess seated on a corpse are called Mahakali, ‘‘great black one.’’ Typically, this collective is seen as benevolent and protective, although occasionally danger is associated with them. Stories exist of Matrikas attacking newborns or pregnant women, with the first 10 days of a child’s life said to be especially dangerous. Fierce Matrikas include Jara, who stole two miscarriages to eat but accidentally formed a whole baby out of them; Pu tana, an ogress who tried to kill the young Krishna by poisoning her breasts; and the husbandless Jyestha. The dangerous Matrikas are offset by benevolent ones to whom offerings are left on crossroads and to whom barren women make sacrifices in hopes of a healthy pregnancy. (Dehejia; Kinsley 1986)
Matsya This goddess was conceived when a king accidentally ejaculated on a leaf that he gave to a parrot to take to his queen. Attacked by a hawk, the parrot dropped the semen-containing leaf, which was eaten by the water nymph Adrika, who took the form of a fish for the occasion. When caught in a net, the fish was found to have twins in her belly: Matsya (‘‘fish-born’’) and her brother, who was adopted by the king while the girl was abandoned to the fisher folk. The fisherwoman Matsya was so smelly, from constantly handling dead fish, that she was called Gandhavati or ‘‘stinky.’’ But she was a good-hearted woman who wished to marry someday. To attract divine attention, she offered her boat to anyone who needed a ride across the river. One of these was a sage, who in the midst of the journey decided he had to have sex with the woman. Although frightened, Matsya agreed. The sage covered them with clouds so that they could not be seen. The sage was so powerful that Matsya lost her virginity, got pregnant, carried her child, delivered her baby, and was restored to virginity within a few moments. In recompense for providing him with offspring, the sage turned Matsya’s odor into an intoxicating fragrance that attracted a king, who married Matsya and made her queen. Because she had been betrayed by her own father, Matsya demanded that only her sons would be allowed to inherit, thus forcing the king to disenfranchise the son he already had. To further ensure that there would be no contenders to the throne, Matsya demanded that the son, Devavrata, take a vow to remain childless; he did so, becoming known as Bhisma, ‘‘terrible vow.’’ But Matsya’s sons were unable to find brides, so Devavrata found a woman named Amba, at whose reincarnated hands he eventually died. The name Matsya is also used as an avatar of the god Vishnu. (Narasimhan; Pattanaik)
Ma ya Maya is a philosophic concept embodied in female form. Her role in the universe is important in Vedanta philosophy, which describes her as the creative force within Brahma. Because she endlessly creates new forms, Maya disguises the ultimate oneness of all beings. Often called ‘‘delusion,’’ she is more properly ‘‘illusion.’’ There is no existence without Maya, but we mistake her for reality. For this reason, Maya is referred to as the veil of illusion, the distracting dance of multiplicity. Maya’s illusion is not falsehood or error; she is the basis of the universe, as well as being that universe. In Buddhism, Maya incarnated as a queen, mother of the bodhisattva Shakyamuni. It was his final rebirth, after having been born of the same mother for many lifetimes. Asleep and alone, Maya dreamed that a white elephant with golden tusks entered her womb through her right side, impregnating her. From that moment, the bodhisattva was fully conscious in Maya’s womb. The pregnancy was pleasurable, for divine nymphs ceaselessly massaged Maya. Anyone whom Maya  touched was instantly healed of disease and unhappiness. When her time drew near, Maya gave birth effortlessly. But seven days later, she died, her life’s purpose fulfilled. She went to heaven to watch over her son, who ascended to heaven to teach her and the other heavenly beings. A number of sites of pilgrimage are devoted to queen Maya, especially around Kapilavastu, where the Buddha was born. (Danielou; Dehejia; Gupta, Sanjukta; Kinsley 1986; O’Flaherty 1980; Paul; Pintchman 1994; Shaw 2006; Whitehead; Young 2004; Zimmer 1946)
Mena  Queen of the world’s highest mountains, Mena lives in the peaks in a golden palace, tended by magical birds and maidens. Her consort, the airy Himavat (Himalaya), was the father of Parvati. According to West Bengali myth, Mena was a devotee of Sati, to whom Mena offered rituals for 27 years. For such devotion, the goddess offered a boon, and Mena asked for 101 children, all boys except for one girl. Sati agreed, adding that she herself would incarnate as Mena’s daughter. As the goddess reincarnated as a child with blue-black skin, flowers fell from the sky like rain. She was named Kali, and she wished to have Shiva as her husband. But her father disagreed, claiming that Shiva was a homeless drunk. He was correct in his estimation, for Kali lived a miserable life with Shiva (see Pa rvati for another version of this myth). (Danielou; Dimmitt and van Buitenen; McDaniel 2004)
Minachiamman A local goddess (see Gramadevata) of Madura, she incarnated as a little girl to revenge herself on a king who dared close her temples. She appeared miraculously in the palace, wearing a bracelet that duplicated a favorite of the queen’s. Astrologers warned the king not to adopt the babe, so he cast Minachiamman into the river, from which a merchant plucked her. He raised her to be a fine young woman who attracted the eye of Shiva, incarnated as a poor man in a village on the River Kaveri. They were so poor that Shiva took the bracelet from his wife’s arm and attempted to sell it. Accused of stealing the queen’s jewel, he was put to death. The goddess, taking her demon form, under which she was called Thurgai, killed the king in retaliation. (Whitehead)
Minaksi Born from a sacrificial fire, Minaksi had three breasts at birth, but her royal parents were warned by a heavenly voice that the third breast should remain until she met her intended husband. Minaksi grew up to become queen of Madurai, from which she set out to conquer the world. City after city fell, until she reached the home of Shiva in the wild Himalayas. Even Shiva’s army could not withstand Minaksi, and as disaster loomed, the god took to the battlefield. There Minaksi’s third breast suddenly disappeared, and the girl realized that Shiva would become her husband. They were wed in Minaksi’s city, where Shiva took the name of Sundaresvara. When their son, Skanda, was old enough to rule, the couple entered the temple dedicated to them and disappeared. They continue to be worshiped in the center of an industrial city of a million residents. One of the largest in India, the temple receives daily visitors in the tens of thousands. The goddess is envisioned as the preeminent member of the couple, such that female-dominant marriages are sometimes called Madurai-marriages. (Berkson; Fuller 1980, 1984; Gupta, Sakti; Hiltebeitel and Erndl; Harman.)
Mitki In Madhya Pradesh, this goddess was once a young woman who lived with both her husband and her brothers. When a dam broke and threatened the area, Mitki’s brothers sacrificed her husband by burying him inside the dam. Mitki, seeing her husband’s hand stretching forth from the earth, drowned herself in the canal and has thereafter been worshiped on Fridays. She possesses people who act as her mediums. (Dehejia)
Miyolangsangma The goddess of the world’s highest mountain, Everest, is the residence of one of five Tibetan goddesses known as the Sisters of Long Life. Their leader is Tashi Tseringma (goddess of Chomolhari in western Bhutan). Golden Miyolangsangma, astride a tiger, carries a bowl of barley, while a mongoose spits out jewels. The main festival of these five goddesses, Mani Rimdu, climaxes in the release of a yak. When international interest in Everest’s peak grew, the region around it was renamed without a goddess reference as Sagarmatha (‘‘Forehead of the Sky’’), a title of the god Vishnu. (Bernbaum, 6–7)
Mohini Once, Vishnu assumed a voluptuous female body and sat beside the milk river, intending to seduce Shiva, wild dancing god of destruction. In the shade of a tree on the ocean’s edge, Shiva and Mohini united in sexual joy. Their flowing juices formed the river Ganges, and from their union the dual-sexed divinity Ariharaputiran was born. (Danielou 2007)
Mrityu Goddess of death, she was unhappy from the moment she was born from the scowl of the high god Brahma and assigned the task of destroying life. She wept until her eyes were as red as her sari, but Brahma convinced her that because humans would fear her, they would be captured once again on the wheel of desire, ensuring that they would be reborn. Mrityu grew into her job, becoming a goddess who killed children in the womb and grooms on their wedding nights. She lived in the cremation grounds outside the village, where food was offered her in hopes that she would stay on the periphery and not wander into the village homes. (Pattanaik.)
Muthuma riamma n This regional agricultural goddess of Puducherry in the Tamil region is celebrated in a 10-day summer festival in which the goddess’s image is paraded through the streets, accompanied by music and the noise of fireworks. She is believed to have the power to protect people against diseases prevalent at that time of year, including smallpox and measles (see also Sitala). Those who are cured of such diseases often offer homage to the goddess by piercing their tongues. (Gupta, Sakti)
Naddidai Daughter of the Parenga goddess Gongadai, Naddidai was washing her clothing at the end of her first menses when a god attempted to rape her. She ran away, her necklaces breaking. The red and black beads turned into red and black ants, which attacked the rapist god. But he continued, so she took her hairstring and tossed it to the ground, where it turned into a snake that bit the god. This discouraged him, and he begged the goddess to forgive him. She agreed, but ants and snakes have remained in the world. (Elwin 1954)
Na ginis These semidivine snake women now appear as background figures in myths but may have had greater religious importance in the past. Sculptures of snakegirdled women found in eastern India suggest that goddesses such as Manasa  may derive from an ancient serpent cult. Indian mythology associates snakes with water, perhaps because the monsoon season brings them out into the open. Although all snakes are revered in India, the most sacred is the cobra, which Indians will not kill. If left alone, the cobra does not strike, for which it is seen as a protective being. During festivals marking the monsoon month, images of Naginis are decorated with silk and ribbons, and food is offered to them. (Dehejia)
Naina Devi The Bilaspur eye goddess was brought to earth by a supernatural cow, who gave great floods of milk at her sacred spot, a place to which pilgrims travel regularly. Most are Sikh, although attendance by followers of that religion at a Hindu shrine is otherwise unusual. Thus, the goddess has been seen as a folk divinity of Sikhism as well as Hinduism. Her sacred lake was formed when the eyes of Sati, whose charred body was being carried around the world by her grieving husband Shiva, fell to earth. (Bhardwaj; Gupta Sakti)
Nanda Devi An aspect of Parvati, Nanda Devi is ‘‘goddess of bliss.’’ Near the border with Nepal, her mountain rises 25,645 feet near peaks called Nanda Ghunti (Nanda’s Veil) and Nanda Kot (Nanda’s fortress). The region around Nanda Devi is intensely sacred, visited by tens of thousands annually to honor the goddess at her many temples and shrines. Every dozen years, a pilgrimage brings an image of Nanda Devi to the mountain, at which time a decorated four-horned ram is released into the snowy wilderness. The goddess was said to have offered solace to humans when, at the dawn of time, the world was flooded. Only the sage Manu and his family were saved when Vishnu took the form of a fish and towed their boat to the peak of Nanda Devi, from which Manu and his wife descended to repopulate the earth. The American mountaineer Willi Unsoeld was so enraptured with the beauty of Nanda Devi that he vowed to name his first daughter after the mountain goddess. In 1977, at the age of 21, Nanda Devi Unsoeld and her father set out to climb the mountain. The young woman died at the summit, where her body remains buried in the snows. Local people believed that the girl was the incarnation of Nanda Devi, and that her death was the return of the goddess to her mountain home. (Bernbaum; Gupta, Sakti 1991; Sax)
Narmada The holy river Narmada is the embodiment of this goddess, who like Gan ga removes the sins of those who bathe in her waters. Even Ganga bathes in Narmada’s waters, in the shape of a black cow. Days when this event is witnessed are especially holy. So holy is Narmada that, to remove all sins of all lifetimes, one must bathe three years in the Saraswati, seven days in the Yamuna, or one day in the Ganges—or merely glance at the Narmada. Narmada’s waters are held effective against snakebite, for which reason she is sometimes considered related to the Naginis. (Gupta, Sakti 1991)
Nidra Nidra, the sleep of time, is a black-skinned goddess clothed in yellow and dark blue silk, who practices ascetic rites. When the evil Kam sa attempted to destroy the world, Nidra descended into the womb of Yasoda while her brother Vishnu incarnated through the womb of Devaki. At birth, the two babies were exchanged, and Kam sa kidnapped the baby he thought was Vishnu and smashed its head against a rock. But the goddess arose and flew to heaven, leaving Vishnu alive, as Krishna, to combat the demon. Nidra is called YogaNidra for her ascetic practices, and Vindhyavasini for the village in which her cult is practiced; sometimes she is viewed as a form of Maya. (Hiltebeitel and Erndl; Ions)
Nimibatapa Among the Sherdukpens, this goddess creates lightning when she has an argument with her husband. He pursues her across the sky, intending to strike her, but she runs away. Her genitals flash lightning while her husband’s heavy steps are the sound of thunder. Other tribes in northwest India tell similar stories. The Miri waterfall goddess Chigum-Erum creates lightning when she lifts her skirt to show her vulva, while her husband creates hail when he spits at her. Another goddess, Dorak, lives with her husband in a water-tank in the sky, which sometimes overflows to cause rain. When it is dry, she lifts her cane-belt, causing lightning from the revelation of her genitals. Meanwhile her husband clashes armor together, causing thunder. (Elwin 1955 NEFA)
Nippong Among the Abors, these water spirits bring harm to women by causing excessive menstruation or miscarriages. Because the Nippongs keep their fingers clenched together, the best way to drive one away is to set fire to her hair, because she finds it hard to put out the flames with joined hands. They appear in men’s dreams, bring them to orgasm, and thus kill them. (Elwin 1955 NEFA)
Nirantali The creator goddess of Orissa gave turbans to the world’s most important people, but she forgot the moon goddess. So Nirantali promised that she would give the moon a turban in return for a feast. The moon held the party, and the goddess gave her a lovely turban. She also gave the moon a baby hare, with instructions to carry it always. When the moon grows full, those on earth can see the ornament on the moon’s face and the hare in her lap. When the sun came wanting a turban too, Nirantali had none left, so she offered instead a crown, which emits golden rays. Nirantali made humans by breaking a metal pot, making powder of the metal, and adding wax. Because of the wax, the first man’s color was black. He was big and fat, with a soft body and buttocks so large they dragged. He was endlessly hungry, so Nirantali gave him rice, which the pregnant moon goddess stole. In revenge, he ate her, but Nirantali made him vomit her back up. For this reason, whenever there was an eclipse, the people threw rice at the moon so that her captor would be distracted and let her go. (Elwin 1954)
Nirriti Humanity’s misfortunes are embodied in this goddess: a weary old woman, starved and leprous, holding out her hand for alms. She protects those born into poverty and crime who attempt to live righteously. Those wishing for a change of luck pray to her as the goddess who endures earth’s misfortunes. Wearing black garments and ornaments that imitate Nirriti’s attire, priests offer sacrifice, then put a stone into water and toss it to the southwest, transferring more disease and ill fortune to Nirriti’s heavy shoulders. An ancient goddess, she was born before Laksmi appeared from the churning of the sea of milk. Thus, misery came into the world before luxury and beauty. Nirriti, who appears in early Vedic literature, has been seen as a precursor to the later development of Kali. She has also been described as the negative aspect of Aditi. (Dexter; Kinsley 1975, 1986)
Padmavati This Jaina snake goddess protected the founder of a dynasty when, as the king was fleeing from his cannibal father’s army, she created a phantom army to frighten away the soldiers. She instructed the king to touch the vulva of her statue with an iron bar, which instantly turned to gold, sufficient for him to establish a city over which he ruled. Rituals to Padmavati connect her with riches and with transformation. (Cort)
Parn asavari ‘‘Leaf-clothed tribal woman’’ is the name of this Buddhist goddess, a beautiful nature divinity who wears clothing made of leaves and flowers. She provides healing through her herbs and magic. She also bears a noose that she uses to capture diseases as though they were cattle. Other weapons such as arrows and swords are also part of her regalia, to be used to destroy negative energies that affect health. She is thus connected with the protective village goddesses (see Gra madevata ), divine mothers who can either bring or ward off epidemics of such dire illnesses as smallpox. (Shaw 2006)
Parvati Whereas the union of Vishnu with Laksmi exemplified the idealized image of Hindu marriage, a different relationship is pictured in the tempestuous marriage of the mountain goddess Parvati and the wild god Shiva. This may arise from the fact that, among ancient goddesses, Parvati is unusual in being both a consort goddess, in which legends emphasize her role as married woman, and a supreme goddess who holds power without needing a mate. She gained Shiva’s attention by practicing asceticism until he could not resist her. Thereafter he spent his time pleasing the goddess. Once she demanded that he provide jewels for her. It took years for him to respond, but finally he showered her with seeds of the rudrakasha (‘‘bead tree’’) that she strung into necklaces and bangles. Once, interrupted during sex before she was satisfied, Parvati cursed the gods so that their consorts were barren but they were pregnant. They were miserable until Shiva allowed them to vomit up the semen that had impregnated them. Another version of the story says that when Shiva and Parvati were interrupted, he was turned into a phallus, while the goddess covered her face with a flower, becoming thereafter known as Lajja-Gauri. Barren women wishing to conceive employ figures with this name, painting the vulva and breasts of the figures with butter and red paint. Parvati is connected to maternity, but never in an ordinary way. Once, she offered her breasts to the gods, but they suckled so hard on her right breast that they drew blood. Undeterred, they continued to suck until the breast shriveled up; Parvati’s blood made these divinities uncontrollable. Parvati had one son of her own. Shiva did not want to be bothered with children, but Parvati wanted a child to caress. Shiva ripped a piece from her skirt and told her to fondle it. Parvati grasped the red cloth and, as it touched the goddess’s nipples, the cloth began to nurse. Thus was benevolent Ganesha born. But Shiva, angry and jealous, found an excuse to behead the child, saying that he slept in a ritually incorrect way. Parvati was desperate with grief, and Shiva, ashamed, told her he would find the boy another head. The only one he could locate was an elephant’s, so Ganesha is now half human, half elephant. "Another myth says the hero Kartikeya was born when, interrupted while he made love to Parvati, Shiva spurted semen into the mouth of the fire god Angi. Kartikeya became leader of heaven’s armies, but he became so lust-filled when he killed that he raped any women he encountered. Parvati put a curse on him that every time he tried to rape a woman, she would turn into the likeness of Parvati. Kartikeya stopped his aggressive behavior. Parvati could function without Shiva, but the reverse was not true. When a sage attempted to trace sacred circles around the god, Parvati told him that he had to circumambulate her as well. The sage refused, so Parvati mounted Shiva, but the sage turned himself into a bee to irritate Shiva into dislodging Parvati. But the goddess melded herself into Shiva. The sage turned himself into a worm, intending to burrow between the two fused sides of the divinity, but the goddess made him so weak that he could no longer stand. When the sage begged for mercy, Parvati gave him a third leg so that he could hobble around the couple and acknowledge their equality. The consort of Shiva is also called Ka li and Durga . One legend explains how the goddess divided herself. Originally, she had dark skin, about which Shiva teased her. Furious, she set off for the mountains, intending to practice asceticism until she gained her desire. With Ganesha accompanying her, she left Viraka, Shiva’s attendant, to guard his bedroom so that he didn’t enjoy other women’s company. But a demon disguised as Parvati attempted to kill Shiva. He lured the god to bed after loading his illusory vagina with real nails. Shiva, recognizing the deceit, put a sword on his penis and dispatched the demon. Parvati’s informants spread the word that a woman had been seen entering Shiva’s bedroom, and Parvati exploded in anger. Her anger shot out of her mouth in the form of a lion. Then she continued practicing yoga until Brahma took pity on her and asked her what she wished. When she said she wanted a golden skin, he blessed her. From her body sprang another goddess: black Ka li. Now golden and beautiful, Parvati started home. Viraka, still on guard, refused to let her enter, not recognizing the goddess. Parvati resides in the sacred mountain Kailas, a major place of pilgrimage. The mountain rises near the source of four great rivers. Although the Ganges does not arise there, Kailas is mythically connected with the descent of that river goddess from heaven. As with many primary goddesses, Parvati bears many names, many of which are identical to those of other goddesses, who may be aspects of Parvati or assimilated to her. She is Uma, Gauri, Sakti, and Bhudevi. As daughter of the god of the Hima- layas, Himavan, and the woman Mena, she bore the name of Haimavati. (Beck et al.; Bennett; Bernbaum; Caughran; Danielou 1964; Dimmitt and van Buitenen; Gupta, Sanjukta; Handelman; Hawley and Wulff 1982; Ions; Kinsley 1986, 1997; O’Flaherty 1980; Pattanaik; Whitehead; Young 1994; Zimmer 1946)"
Pedamma -Mariamma  The virgin goddess saw a jasmine blooming near an anthill. Transforming herself into a bird, she sat on the flower until she conceived, then laid three eggs, one of which was sterile while the other two contained the universe and the gods. When the gods were old enough, she taught them how to pray and then decided to make them her consorts. Brahma and Vishnu refused her, but Shiva agreed, in return for the third eye she wore in her forehead. When she agreed, she was turned into an old woman, with no desire for sex. Full of vengeance, she began to kill demons. But every time demon blood fell to earth, more demons were conceived, so she began to lick the earth with her enormous tongue. Thus she captured the blood as it fell, except for the bit that formed a buffalo demon that the goddess fought and killed. At her festivals, a buffalo sprinkled with turmeric is sacrificed in commemoration of her heroic deed, and her image is carried from the temple to the town’s boundary to protect it. (Jayakar; Whitehead)
Phoureima This Indian rice goddess is personified in a round black stone sitting in a pot upon a bed of rice grains (never directly on the ground) within the granary. So long as the goddess is honored in this way, it is believed that there will be no shortage of rice. (Hamilton)
Pidari This South Indian snake goddess was depicted with flaming hair and three eyes; she held a noose and a drum to frighten away evil spirits from the villages she guarded. Her worship has been traced to the first millennium CE. (Whitehead)
Ponniyamman The ‘‘rice mother’’ of Tamil Nadu, Ponniyamman is one of the Sapta Kannimaars (‘‘seven virgin sisters’’) represented by rock heads placed in fields, the earth forming the goddess’s body. She is honored in rituals where she is offered rice cakes and other food that is then ceremoniously consumed. (Hamilton)
Prajna pa ramita This figure, a golden-skinned woman who emits rays of light, was the mother of space and of secrets hidden at time’s beginning, to be revealed when humankind is sufficiently advanced. She was especially prominent in Sri Lanka, where Buddhism has been dominant since the 3rd century CE. (Dehejia; Shaw 2006; Zimmer 1946, 1955)
Prakrti Hindu philosophy gives divine feminine form to three philosophical concepts: Maya, Sakti, and Prakrti. These three concepts are closely connected and sometimes difficult to separate, as each is identified with one or another of the triad. As articulated early in the Common Era, Prakrti stands for feminine energy as the universal creative principle. Prakrti’s male counterpart is Purusa, consciousness, who took the form of Brahma. Prakrti is the active part of the dyad, for without her the god is inactive and uncreative. The goddess has three major qualities: purity, activity, and lethargy, combinations of which form everything in the tangible universe. Early in creation, Prakrti laid an egg, then surrounded it with seven layers of herself. Within the egg grew Brahma, together with other divine and semidivine beings. When they were born, the afterbirth formed the mountains, while the water of Prakrti’s womb became the ocean. Self-knowing and endless, Prakrti exists everywhere in various individual forms. She is therefore paradoxical, divinely alone but with uncountable forms. (Danielou 1964; Dimmitt and van Buitenen; Gupta, Sanjukta; Hiltebeitel and Erndl; Kinsley 1986; Pattanaik; Pintchman 1994)
Prapancesvari ‘‘Mistress of the fivefold world,’’ this early Hindu Tantric goddess may be the same as, or have given rise to, the world mistress Bhuvanesvari. Sun-colored and brilliant, she ruled the five elements of earth, air, fire, water, and ether. As such, she was embodied in mountains, winds, stars, and oceans. Other names for this goddess were Pradhana (‘‘receptacle of matter’’) and Prakrti. (Kinsley 1997)
Prthivi The feminine earth in both Hinduism and Buddhism is Prthivi, a cosmic cow full of milk for her children. A pre-Vedic divinity, she lost power as Hinduism spread. Many prayers are offered to her, but she figures in few myths. In one, Prthivi hid treasures until threatened with death by a king whom she had married. She could find no refuge among the gods, so she returned to her husband, who beat her, which is why farmers use sharp tools to cut into the earth. Although generally a benevolent goddess, she shows her fierce side during earthquakes, when she evinces displeasure at human behavior. In Southeast Asian Buddhism, she was depicted wringing out her wet hair, thus connecting life-sustaining earth and water. (Gupta, Sanjukta; Ions; Kinsley 1986; Pintchman 1994; Shaw 2006)
Ra dha  Each time Laksmi became human, so did her consort Vishnu. When he was born as Krishna, she was reborn as Radha, one of the Gopis. Although married to his uncle, Radha could not resist the beautiful Krishna. Like the other Gopis, she danced with him at night, offering love that he finally returned. Every night Radha stole from her home to make love on the banks of a river. Gossip caused Radha to become a pariah and Krishna grew ill with fever, for which the lustful Gopis blamed Radha. But a sage predicted that water carried in a sieve would cure the god. Every woman tried, but the water ran out the holes. Finally, Radha successfully carried the curative water, proving that her love was chaste despite defying social convention. Radha is customarily worshiped alongside Krishna, for devotees regard them as eternally united and as presiding now in the heaven to which their followers aspire. Radha is honored in rituals and shrines in northern India, where she inhabits a woman’s body for the occasion. Naked except for jewelry and flowers, the woman is given reverence by groups of male and female worshipers. Love-tormented poems in the voice of Radha form part of the canon of Indian literature. (Dehejia; Dimmitt and van Buitenen; Gupta, Sanjukta; Hawley and Wulff 1982, 1996; Ions; Kinsley 1986; King; Pattanaik; Sharma)
Rangada This maiden was brought up dressed as a boy. She learned all the manly arts, from riding and hunting to fighting like a warrior. One day, when she was hunting, she stumbled upon the sleeping hero Arjuna. Finding him attractive, she sat on her heels watching him until he woke, then told him frankly that she wished to enjoy his body. Shocked at her frankness, Arjuna said that he had taken a vow of celibacy—and besides, he would never been tempted by such an aggressive woman. So Rangada went home. There she dressed herself in womanly silks, perfumed herself, and went back to Arjuna’s tent. It did not take him long to break his vow, and he did so frequently for the next 13 months. But Rangada’s people came looking for her, bemoaning the loss of their village protector. As they sang her praises—how she rode, how she fought—Arjuna began to wonder aloud what it would be like to love such a strong woman. Finally, Rangada came from the tent to see her former comrades; they were overjoyed to see her, and Arjuna was thrilled to ride into battle beside his bedmate. (Ghosh; Pattanaik)
Ratri Kindly goddess of passionate night, Ratri is sister of Usas, the dawn. Each night she walks the earth, wearing dark robes set with stars. Her devotees pray for safety from robbers, wolves, and other dangers. Ratri was an embodiment of Kali. But while Kali was the perpetual night that ends creation, Ratri was earthly night in which all beings rest. In esoteric tradition, Ratri symbolized enlightenment, for if Maya’s dance of creation confuses the senses, Ratri’s darkness permits less confusion. (Danielou 1964; Dehejia; Ions; Kinsley 1986, 1997; O’Flaherty 1980; Pattanaik)
Ren uka Renuka was the wife of a sage, so dutiful that she went out every day when her husband practiced archery and picked up every arrow he shot. But one day she did not return and her husband, suspecting her of infidelity, demanded to know where she had been. She was overwhelmed, she said, by the heat, and had sought shelter under a tree. The next day, the sage threatened to shoot the sun out of the sky in order to protect his wife. But the sun god offered a compromise: a parasol and sandals to protect Renuka. Renuka is a model of the perfect wife. She was said to be so holy that she could carry water in sieves. But she was not so pure that she did not occasionally entertain a lascivious thought. This happened when she saw a handsome man frolicking in the river. Instantly the impurity caused her to lose her magical power, which revealed her adulterous fantasy to her husband when suddenly water ran out the holes in her sieve. Furious, he had his son behead Renuka. Because of his son’s obedience, the father granted him a boon, and he asked that Renuka be brought back to life with no memory of her death. Because she had hidden among lower-caste people who had been beheaded for sheltering her, Renuka’s head was placed accidentally on the body of an outcaste woman, after which she was called Elamma (or Embika-Elamma). The same story is told of the village goddess Mariyamman. Near Puducherry, Renuka is honored as a goddess whose special boon was the curing of diseases, especially those involving the eyes. At a temple dedicated to her, three major festivals invoke her curative powers. At all three, the image of the goddess is dressed in silk and led in procession through the town, with devotees feeding the poor in the goddess’s honor. (Dehejia; Gupta, Sakti 1991; Jayakar; Pattanaik; Pintchman 2001)
Rohini The sage Daksha had 27 daughters, all married to the moon god Chandra. But though the moon promised to spend his favors equally, he fell in love with Rohini. Daksha cursed the moon with consumption, but his daughters prevailed on him to lighten his curse, so he allowed the disease to be chronic rather than fatal. Whenever Chandra leaves Rohini at the full moon, he wanes and grows thin. (O’Flaherty 1975; Pattanaik; Zimmer 1946)
Sakti In Hinduism, goddess energy animates male divine energy. Thus religious artists show a goddess having intercourse atop a god, activating his languid body. Like Prakrti and Ma ya , Sakti refers to an abstract understanding—in this case, power and potency. Sakti can also refer to the essence of femaleness. Each member of the Vedic trinity was provided with his Sakti: Maya enlivening creative Brahma; Laksmi empowering nurturing Vishnu; and Parvati or Kali as the consort of destructive Shiva. But Sakti is sometimes used as a name for Shiva’s energy alone. Little myth describes this goddess. When the genderless god Bhagavan uttered the primal sound (‘‘Om’’), Sakti emerged. She immediately wished to have intercourse with the god, who divided into Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. She was so powerful that Brahma, looking at her, grew old and gray. Vishnu grew afraid and called her ‘‘mother,’’ but Shiva united with her and satisfied her. But when Sakti realized that Vishnu was mocking her in his heart, she cursed him to have 10 incarnations, in each of which he would be threatened by demons and would have to call upon Sakti to save him. The Hinduism in which the goddess is most prominent is called Saktism. Although goddesses are found in all forms of Hinduism, the goddess is not central in other forms. Some forms of Saktism see all goddesses as unitary, while others envision the many goddesses as separate. Sometimes Saktism centers entirely on the goddess, other times including worship of her consort. To qualify as Saktism, the tradition must see the goddess and her female energy as the supreme creative and liberative power of the universe. Saktism is based in experience, for its teachings are transmitted orally from guru to student. Sakti is also significant in Tantric philosophy. While Shakta Hin- duism emphasizes the role of the goddess, some Tantric schools talk about the polarity of being, with Sakti being the necessary counterpart of every god. But just as fre- quently, the goddess may be seen as primary, with no male counterpart. (Beane; Brown; Gupta, Sanjukta; Gupta and Gombrich; Hiltebeitel and Erndl; Kinsley 1986; Koppers; McDaniel 2004; Pintchman 1994, 2001; Warrier; Zimmer 1946)
Samjna  The sun’s wife Samjna hid in the wilderness disguised as a mare when her husband’s intense brilliance tired her, leaving her disguised handmaiden Chhaya in her place. But the sun discovered her ruse and transformed himself into a stallion to have intercourse with her. Samjna turned her face to him, but he breathed upon her and she conceived through her nose. From their union came the horse-headed Aswins, as well as the god of death Yama and his sister Yami. Samjna agreed to return to the sky, but first she had her father trim away some of the sun’s rays to diminish his brightness. The weapons of other gods were fashioned from the extra pieces of sun. The goddess Saranyu, sometimes identified with Usas, had a similar marriage. She bore the sun twin children, Yama and Yami, but she grew weary of her husband’s brilliance and left a maid in her place, upon whom her husband fathered a child. She was able to remain away for years, until Yama annoyed the substitute, who kicked him so hard that the child was wounded. This alerted Saran yu's husband to the deception, and he found his true wife. (Danielou 1964; Hawley and Wulff 1996; Ions; Kramrisch; O’Flaherty 1979; Pattanaik)
Sarada Devi During her lifetime, Sarada Devi became known as an incarnation of Ka li or Durga. Wife of the poet and spiritual leader Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, she is honored as the primary goddess of the tradition he founded. She was partially crippled from rheumatism and spent much of her time caring for a mentally handicapped adopted daughter, yet during her lifetime she attracted many followers and since then has continued to inspire devotion. Born on December 22, 1853, she was married at the age of five to Ramakrishna, believed by his family to be mad and thus in need of marriage, but she did not live with her husband until she was 16. With her father, she walked 60 miles to meet her husband, who immediately began to worship her as an incarnation of the goddess. They lived together in a sexless marriage, with recent work finding a reason in Ramakrishna’s homosexuality. Widowed when she was 32, Sarada went through a period of poverty and isolation until her woman followers began to describe the ecstasies she experienced. After being derided for her unwillingness to give up her bright saris and bangles, a requirement of widowhood, Sarada had a vision of Ramakrishna that revealed that he was not dead, thus she could not be a widow and was, like him, divine. Thereafter, until her death on July 20, 1920, Sarada served as guru and incarnate divinity to many and wore the bangles to emphasize her status as goddess. (Kripal; McDaniel 1989, 2004; Pintchman 2001)
Sarameya Mother of dogs and wild animals, she was one of the primal goddesses formed when the god Brahma’s only daughter, Shatarupa, divided herself in order to quickly populate the world. As Sarama (possibly ‘‘to speed’’), she was sent to find the missing divine cows, performing miracles as she went. Finding the cows with the demons that had stolen them, Sararma was tempted with butter and milk to side with the demons. She refused, returning to the gods with the location of their precious cattle. (Another version claims she, acting as a typical dog, ate up the milk and then skulked back to heaven, where she was forced to vomit up the milk. She fled back to the demons, with the gods following the trail of her vomit to locate the missing cattle.) For this deed, Sarama was given the boon that her descendents would all be able to kill anything that attacked them, even tigers. (Kramrisch; O’Flaherty 1985; Pattanaik)
Sarasvati For the world to come into being, Brahma required the power of his consort Sarasvati. As such, she is called Viraj, the female part of primordial chaos. Sarasvati’s portraits show a sinuous light-skinned woman wearing a lunar headdress as she sits astride a swan or peacock. In four arms she holds a book, a musical instrument, a rosary, and a ritual pot, to indicate her connection with the arts and the sacred. Her colors are white and yellow, sometimes with a touch of watery blue, for she is one of a trinity of water goddesses that includes Gan ga and Yamuna (see Yami). Sarasvati is also goddess of eloquence. Inventor of arts and sciences, patron of intellectual endeavors, Sarasvati is honored by students and artists. She is Laksmi’s rival, for if someone has the favor of one goddess, the other turns away. In her identity as Va c, she invented the sacred language, Sanskrit. Sarasvati is primarily an independent goddess and has been so since her first appearance in the Vedas. She has, however, been enlisted into narratives as the consort of both Brahma and Vishnu. In Vaishnava thought, Sarasvati was cast as co-wife to Vishnu with Laksmi and Ganga. But she was jealous of Ganga, accusing her of stealing Vishnu’s affections. The other wives drove her away because of her angry outbursts, whereupon she became Brahma’s consort. She remained somewhat haughty in her new role. Once she refused to hurry to meet Brahma for a sacrifice, so the god married Gayatri as an immediate stand-in. In retaliation, Sarasvati cursed Brahma that he would only be worshiped once a year, a curse that remains in effect. On the whole, however, these stories are not well-known, and although they place Sarasvati in association with male deities for a limited period, they equally account for the fact that she has no consort. Sarasvati is portrayed and worshiped alone, the sovereign goddess of music, art, and learning. Sarasvati is celebrated at the spring festival of Vasanta Pachami, when people dress in yellow clothes to mimic the mustard blooming in the fields. Sarasvati is a special goddess of the Jains, a religion that began in the first millennium BCE  and that emphasizes not divinity but transcendent jinas, highly evolved souls. Yet even this nontheistic religion could not entirely eliminate devotion to the goddess, of whom Sarasvati was the favorite form. (Danielou 1964; Dehejia; Gupta, Sakti 1991; Gupta, Sanjukta; Ions; Kinsley 1986; Kramrisch; Sharma; Shaw 2006; Subramaniam; Warrier)
Sati Anglicized, her name becomes suttee, for Sati was the first woman to dare the flames of death. An incarnation of Devi, she was married against her father’s will to an incarnation of Shiva named Rudra. She immolated herself when Rudra’s honor was threatened and he, in wild grief, began to dance with her corpse. (Some stories say that anger transformed Sati into Ka li, and that she destroyed the integrity of the sacrifice by her suicide, whereupon her consort began dancing with her charred corpse.) But Vishnu hacked her body apart, and as the pieces fell to earth, they sanctified each place. This began the Tantric practice of honoring the yoni, the genitals of the goddess fallen to earth, and thus too began the practice of yoga, which Shiva inaugurated as a way of distancing himself from the wildness of his emotions at Sati’s death. In Tantra, Sati is the source of the 10 goddesses known as the Mahavidyas, which include Kali and Ta ra . The goddesses were created when Sati and Shiva were not invited to the home of Sati’s father, who disapproved of Shiva’s going about naked and meditating in cremation grounds. Sati, infuriated by this slight, decided to confront her father. Shiva forbade her, so Sati transformed herself into a terrifying but beautiful goddess with a lolling tongue and a necklace of skulls. When Shiva attempted to run away, Sati surrounded him with 10 different forms of herself, the Mahavidyas. Thereupon Shiva acknowledged her wish, and the goddesses disappeared. Sati went to her father’s home and immolated herself in protest of his actions. She was reborn as Uma or Parvati. The practice of suttee can be dated to as early as 400 BCE. Although praised as an act of loyalty to the deceased husband, suttee may have been the only option for a woman who faced a life of grinding poverty as a widow. Drugs may have been used to induce women into fiery oblivion, allowing property to pass to male relatives. Outlawed in 1829, the practice has continued to the present despite the ban. While the practice attracts a great deal of attention from lay readers as well as scholars, it is argued that it has always been the exception rather than the rule. In Rajasthan in 1987, Roop Kanwar was immolated with her husband at the age of 18 after a brief arranged marriage, igniting both an outcry against wife-murder and attempts to deify the girl. Evidence that she was drugged, stumbling on her way to her death, convinced many that her death was at least partially unwilling, as do reports that she attempted to escape the flames. Her death, celebrated by as many as a quartermillion people, resulted in trial of her father-in-law and others, but all were acquitted of her murder. As a result of Roop Kanwar’s death, a law outlawing the glorification of Sati was passed. In most areas of India, a widow faces a difficult life. She lives in almost complete isolation and often receives little food. She cannot participate in any social events or eat with others. Some have argued that some women indeed embrace death over such a life. But not all ‘‘bride-murders’’ involve immolation or the death of a husband. In 2000, a young woman was beaten to death for carrying an empty water jar, an inauspicious action. Women who survive ‘‘bride-burning,’’ horribly disfigured, are often said to have accidentally burned themselves. The number of victims is difficult to ascertain, although figures in the thousands or even tens of thousands are offered. Objections to the practice of suttee and other forms of violence against women are the subject of feminist activity in India today. (Cormack; Dimmitt and van Buitenen; Hawley; Hawley and Wulff 1996; Ions; Kinsley 1986, 1989, 1997; Leslie; M. Sen; Sharma; Zimmer 1946) Sedi-Bakup Among the Komkar people of Pakistan, Sedi-Bakup is the earth goddess, married to Melo-Baloat, the sky man. At the beginning of time, they lived so close that there was no room for the people and animals to lift their heads. So they joined together with the spirits to determine what could be done. A brave spirit, Sid-Diyor, grabbed the sky man and beat him so furiously that he ran away. As he rose, space opened between the sky and earth, revealing that Sedi-Bakup was pregnant. She gave birth to two daughters, Bong and Bomong, but was so sad at the loss of her husband that she could not look at them. They later became the sun and the moon. (Elwin 1955 NEFA)
Shatarupa On the cosmic ocean slept Vishnu, from whose navel rose a lotus carrying Brahma. Brahma created sons by thinking, but sons alone cannot populate the universe. So he knitted his brow, from which sprang forth two-sexed Shiva. Brahma divided Shiva into two parts, the left becoming Shatarupa, who could take any form. As soon as she was born, Shatarupa so excited Brahma that he grew four new heads with more eyes to watch her. Shatarupa saw her father’s eyes shining with lust. She transformed herself into a cow, whereupon he became a bull; she turned into a mare, he a stallion; she became a doe, and he turned into a buck. But she created new beings more quickly than he could respond. All creation rises from Shatarupa’s attempt to avoid her father; she is usually considered identical to Sarasvati. A similar figure is found in Sandhya, created by the god Prajapati when he discovered that his thought-generated sons could not propagate. But he became lustful toward his daughter, who ran to her brothers for help. They asked a monkey’s help, so he shot an arrow into Prajapati, whose ejaculate formed a lake from which all animals were born. This goddess also appears as Savitri. The name is given to a beautiful brilliant woman who remained unmarried because men found her intimidating. So she decided to travel the world, looking for a husband. She had no luck but, when she returned home, met a woodcutter. Despite her father’s objections, Savitri decided to marry him; he was secretly a king, driven from his throne by corrupt officials. The couple was wed despite predictions that he would live only one year. When four days remained of the allotted lifespan, Savitri began fasting. When the fated day came, she begged to accompany her husband to the forest. There Savitri encountered the god of death and, when Satyavan’s soul was taken, followed it to the otherworld. Yama, god of death, offered her any boon but her husband’s life. She asked for 100 sons, which was granted. Then Savitri demanded her husband, for she had already been pledged 100 sons and needed him to make that happen. Impressed with her cleverness, Yama released her husband. Savitri is honored in a festival during which women fast and pray that their husbands will live long lives. Offerings of rice, wheat, millet, lentils, chickpeas, and sorghum are left at the base of a long-living banyan tree, around which married women dance. (Babb; Beswick; Danielou 1964; Dimmitt and van Buitenen; Gupta, Sakti 1991; Gupta, Sanjukta; Kinsley 1986; Pattanaik; Sharma; Zimmer 1946)
Sichi The earth goddess of the Singpho, Tagin, and Minyon peoples of Pakistan quarreled with her husband, the sky, when he threatened her with an army of stars. She retaliated by threatening him with the poisonous snakes that lived in her waters, which so frightened him that he surrendered. But he still intended to kill Sichi, so he began to lower himself until it seemed he would kill everything on the earth’s surface. Birds and animals gathered, discussing what they could do to make the sky move back up. A bird finally served as ambassador between the warring spouses, setting up a treaty that both would remain indoors for 10 days or risk becoming deformed. Sechi could not endure the captivity and exited her home after three days, for which reason the earth has bumps and ridges on it. But the sky stayed indoors and so is smooth all over. The similarly named primal goddess of the Minyong, Sedi-Nane, created the thunder when she wept over the death of her children, while the lightning came from her flashing eyes. (Elwin 1958)
Sita Sita, born from the earth when it was cut with a plow, was reincarnated from the woman Vedavati, whom the demon Ravana threatened with rape. She burned herself to death rather than endure his assault. Nine months later, she was reborn to Ravana’s wife. When the demon heard a prophecy that the child would cause his death, she was thrown into the ocean. But the sea would not kill her and gave her to the earth, who assured her safe rebirth. The moment she saw Rama, she fell in love with him. But her father had set a condition for a suitor: a huge bow that belonged to Shiva had to be lifted, strung and shot by the hopeful bridegroom. Many came, eyed the bow, and left without even trying. But Rama, with one swift movement, met the required challenge, and the destined couple was reunited in marriage. Soon the couple faced their first challenge together, because Rama’s mother’s cowife, Kaikeyi, denied his claim to his father’s throne. She was within reason, for she had extracted a promise that her own son would inherit the throne. Kaikeyi forced Rama into exile for 14 years, charged with ridding the land of demons. Loving Sita accompanied him, but while in that forest exile, Sita was kidnapped by Ravana. A golden deer with jewel-covered legs came from the forest. Enraptured with the creature, Sita begged Rama to capture it. While Rama chased the improbable animal, Ravana captured Sita. Rama destroyed Ravan a, fulfilling their destiny. But even divine incarnations are imperfect, and Rama doubted Sita’s chastity during her imprisonment. Though Sita successfully underwent a test of fire, Rama continued to doubt. Sita , pregnant, retreated to the wilderness to bear twin sons who, recognized as adolescents by Rama, brought about the couple’s reunion. But still Rama doubted. Sita called for a final test: earth, which gave her birth, should take her back if she were innocent. The earth opened and Sita disappeared, leaving Rama convinced of her purity and heartbroken at her loss. As Rama was an avatar of Vishnu, Sita is connected with Laksmi. Like other consort goddesses, she reincarnated with her husband, becoming his partner in life after life. In each lifetime, she was loyal and modest. In one, Vishnu incarnated as a leper, but Sita (here named Anasu ya) treated him with respect, even taking him to a prostitute when he demanded it. As he rode on her back to the brothel, the leper kicked a demon, who cursed Vishnu with death at sunrise. The loyal Sita  kept light from returning until the gods removed both curses. (Danielou 1964; Dehejia; Dimmitt and van Buitenen; Hawley and Wulff 1982; Ions; Kinsley 1986, 1997; Narayan; Pattanaik; Sharma; Warrier; Whitehead)
Sitala This goddess possesses those stricken with smallpox. Born after other goddesses, Sitala had difficulty getting humans to pay attention to her, so she invented smallpox to force them to her altars. Now Sitala is one of the most worshiped goddesses of India, called the Mata (‘‘mother’’) of each village. Another version of her birth says that a prince who wanted a male heir offered a sacrificial fire, from which a woman emerged. Brahma told her to carry lentils always, to assure that humans would honor her. When she desired a mate, she was given a demon born from the sweat of Shiva’s austerities. Then she and her mate visited the gods in disguise, changing the lentils into poxes. The gods implored her to set her lentils loose on earth, promising that this would encourage people to worship her. Pictured as a red-clad, golden-skinned goddess with a winnowing fan to cool victims of the disease or carrying rods to strike her victims, Sitala is honored by menstruating women. The appropriate ritual involves placing a pan of water in front of her image, with a prayer that pox would pass over the home. On her feast days, children were taken to her temples and blessed with flowers and water; if they were not stricken, the parents would offer thanksgiving gifts to the goddess. Sometimes said to be Kali, Sitala is worshiped annually in the festival called Thadari, when cooking fires must go out and cooling buttermilk porridge is served. In northern India, the Shitala Ashtami festival in late winter celebrates Sitala as Vasanta, who wears yellow, the color of the season’s blossoms. The goddess is honored by housecleaning, for she hates dirt and disorder. The cleaning doubtless has a prophylac- tic effect, especially in seasons when disease threatens. (Babb; Gatwood; Gupta, Sakti 1991; Hawley and Wulff 1982; Ions; Kinsley 1986; McDaniel 2003; Misra; Pattanaik; Patton; Sharma)
Sitatapatra This Buddhist goddess protects devotees from black magic and astrological disasters. She carries a huge silken parasol, indicating the umbrella of protection she casts around her children. The goddess’s emergence is described by her full name of Usnisasitatapatra, ‘‘lady of white parasol who emerged from Buddha’s crown of light.’’ She has 1,000 legs so that she can rush to her worshipers’ aid, and her body is covered with eyes so that she may better watch over them. (Shaw 2006)
Sonwari Among the Kerba people of Orissa, this was the name of the woman who brought light to the world. She lived alone in darkness until she was married, at which time she moved in with her husband. Both while single and later as a married woman, she wore great golden earrings. One day, as she was drawing water, a huge bird came from the sky and snatched one of the beautiful earrings and tossed it into the spider’s web that stretched across the sky. There, it fixed itself and became the sun that afterward lit the world. Through her tears over her lost ornament, Sonwari was grateful for the light and warmth. (Elwin 1954)
Srid-Icamphrul-mo-che Tibet’s ancestral goddess lived in heaven with her parents and her only brother. When a human man asked for her in marriage, she accepted. But before she departed the heavens, she asked for her half of the world as her inheritance. But she was told that, as a girl, she only got one-third, as well as a spindle from her mother and an arrow from her father. These dowry gifts were sufficient for SridIcam to create a comfortable world for her descendents. In northwestern Tibet, this goddess’s name is rNam-rgyal. (Bonnefoy) Srimati Two sages both fell in love with this princess, and both asked her father for her hand, but neither sought the opinion of the girl herself. Srimati’s father told the two sages that choice of a husband was the girl’s, not his, and that they could present them- selves to her at court. Both sages then prayed to the god Vishnu that the other would be given the face of a monkey, and when they turned up to present their suites to the princess, she found herself confronted by two men with identical monkey faces. Instead, she turned to a beautiful young man standing nearby and put a garland around his neck, indicating her desire to wed him. The young man was the god Vishnu in disguise. (Pattanaik)
Subbu-Khai-Thung The Dhammai people gave this name to the earth goddess, born from the primal mother Zumiang-Nui. Right after her birth, Subbu-Khai-Thung disappeared into the mouth of a worm, but her mother killed the worm and found her alive within his belly, from which the earth was formed for the goddess to rule. Subbu-Khai-Thung bore a series of children in twin pairs, boy and girl; each of them mated to give birth to earth’s creatures. (Elwin 1958)
Suja ta  Buddhist legend tells of this woman, daughter of a village chief, who was inspired by a vision to offer food to the future Buddha. Her vision instructed her to wish for his enlightenment as she offered him a dish of the freshest rice cooked in the cream of a thousand cows. She prepared the meal, then strewed flowers about and sent for the future Buddha. She offered the sweet rice in a golden bowl, which she gave to him, despite the fact that as an ascetic he had no need of such an object. This gift sustained him for his final meditations. Shortly afterwards, he attained enlightenment. (Young 2004; Zimmer 1955)
Sukanya  When this princess accidentally blinded a sage by poking a twig into the ants’ nest where he was performing austerities, her father bore the brunt of the resultant curse. To avoid his fate, the king gave Sukanya (‘‘lovely maiden’’) to the sage. Blind and cranky, the man was not a good husband for a princess, but she was a loyal wife nonetheless. When twin trickster gods tried to seduce her, she refused; when they transformed her husband into their likeness, she was still able to see his identity and avoid being compromised. Impressed with her loyalty, the gods left Sukanya’s husband with his new youthful beauty so that they could enjoy true marital pleasure. (O’Flaherty 1985; Pattanaik)
Surabhi One of the beings who emerged from the ocean as it was churned in primordial times was the cow Surabhi, goddess of plenty, called the ‘‘fragrant one.’’ She forthwith produced all luxury—and a daughter,  Nirriti (‘‘misery’’) as well. She was also said to have been one of the multiple forms of the god Brahma’s only daughter, Shatarupa, and the ancestral mother of all domesticated animals. (Danielou 1964; Kinsley 1986; Pattanaik)
Su rya The feminine sun has a name almost identical to that of her father, Surya. Little myth exists about her, although she is referred to as the consort of the twin gods, the Asvins. Her father intended to marry her to the moon god, Soma. A race was held, with Su rya as the prize, and the twins were the winners. Thereafter, she rode with them in their chariots through the sky. Some texts describe her as the consort of Soma and the embodiment of sacrifices to him. (Kinsley 1986)
Swasthani In Nepal, this goddess is widely honored as a representative of ideal womanhood and a protector of the home. A form of Devi, she is described in the Swasthani Vrata Katha, a sacred text that may have come from India. Invoked through fasting by women only, Swasthani especially concerns herself with women’s marital happiness. (Bennett)
Taleju The Nepalese guardian goddess was a virginal woman who, insulted when the king cast lustful eyes at her, left his borders unguarded to teach him a lesson. He sued for mercy, and she agreed to return so long as he worshiped her thereafter in the form of a girl who had not yet menstruated, on the belief that this would keep him from having lascivious thoughts. Such girls, called Kumari, are said as well to incarnate the goddess Durga. (Pattanaik)
Tambaku The spirit of the tobacco plant was once a yearning young woman who was unfortunately so unattractive that she could not attract the attention of a lover. Her father offered a huge dowry, but no one came forward to marry Tambaku, who soon died of loneliness. She was reincarnated as the tobacco plant, which all men love. (Pattanaik)
Tansirjo The sun goddess of the Bondo of Orissa was the sister of the moon goddess, Jonmati. They shared a house together with their children, giving equally to all even though Tansirjo had more children. But one day Jonmati grew angry that she was feeding more of her sister’s children than her own, and so she hid hers in her hair. When Tansirjo came in and asked where the children were, Jonmati said they had been bothering her so she ate them. This made Tansirjo aware of how annoying her own children were, so she ate them too. When Jonmati’s children came out of their mother’s hair, Tansirjo wished she could have her own back. But she could not bring them out of her stomach. Furious, she cast Jonmati out and remains hot with anger to this day. But Jonmati, though she has her children with her, misses her sister and is very cold for that reason. (Elwin 1954)
Ta ra  Tara is one of the 10 Mahavidyas in Hindu Tantric practice. She is second in importance only to Ka li, although tradition stresses that all goddesses are ultimately one. Blue-skinned and wearing bone jewelry, she sits on a corpse, blazing like a pyre. This frightening Tara can show her kindly side, for she carries the dead on a ghostly boat rowed by beautiful singing boat-women. She always aids her devotees when they are in need. Yet even to this kindly goddess, blood sacrifices of goats are offered daily. Tara is more fully a Buddhist figure. Although Buddhist cosmology is nontheistic, most figures of devotion are male, with Tara an important exception. Because of the multiplicity of her images, she can be seen as a collective figure, incorporating many features of divine females in the Indian landscape. The earliest textual references refer to her as ‘‘lady twilight,’’ a bodhisattva second only to Avalokitesvara, of whom she is sometimes said to be the female aspect. She came into being when Avalokitesvara, about to reach nirvana, heard the cries of humans whom he would leave behind. He shed a single tear, and that tear was Traa  . In Tibet, where she is honored among all classes and sects, Tara appears as an ancestral mother. In her incarnation as a sexually eager rock ogress she mated with a monkey (Avalokitesvara in disguise), from whom the royal family was born. This ‘‘White Tara’’ or Drolkar is a generous maternal figure with a personal relationship with each worshiper. She offers protection and relief from life’s difficulties, for she is the epitome of compassion. Calling out to Traa   or reciting her mantra provides protection from enemies and dangers. Yet this Traa   too has a fierce side, depicted wearing a crown of skulls and a necklace of decapitated heads. She dances, attired in a tiger’s skin and baring her fangs, to drive away a devotee’s enemies or to conquer evil spirits. Dressed in red garments, devotees can embody the powerful energy of the goddess after reciting her mantra 10,000 times. (Beyer; Bu¨hnemann; Galland; Kinsley 1997; Shaw 2006)
Ta ra ka This woman’s father was a yaksha (see Yaksi); as befits a nature spirit, she was wild and energetic. When a sage killed the father of her sons, Traa  ka and her children demanded retribution. Instead, they were turned into demons who devoured everything with fire. The sons abandoned their mother, who created deserts out of fertile land until killed by Rama, an incarnation of Vishnu. Taraka was also the name of a woman who attracted the eye of the moon god Soma. He kidnapped her from her husband, a sage, and refused to release her. During the war that followed, Soma was vanquished and Traa  ka returned to her husband. There she was found to be pregnant, with the father of the child unknown. When the child was born, he was a beautiful infant, but the humiliated Traa  ka hid him in a clump of grass and only under threat of a curse presented him to Soma; the child became the planet Mercury. (Gupta, Sakti 1971; Narayan)
Ta ri In Bengal, the sun god propositioned this earth goddess. She refused him, so he created human women. But they took up the worship of the goddess, and the struggle between Tria    and the sun continues to this day. In the early 20th century it was estimated that as many as 150 people annually were sacrificed to this goddess. Brought in or captured from another village, the victims were treated with respect and kept well fed, often for years, before being sacrificed. The victims were drugged and told the story of how the goddess required blood in order to be fruitful, before being attacked by the entire village, armed with sharp knives. The body parts and blood were used for rituals of restoration of the goddess’s fertility. When the sacrifices were outlawed, animals were substituted. (Berkson; Zimmer 1968
Thabaton In Manipur, there was once a beautiful girl whose seven brothers went in search of fortune, leaving her unprotected. A tiger demon heard about her lonely situation and came to abduct and eat her. As Thabaton was dragged through the jungle, she ripped tiny pieces of her garments and left them to mark her trail. It was many years later that the brothers finally returned and, finding the house empty, set off in search of her and, following her fabric trail, were able to locate and free her. But she wanted revenge on the tiger abductor, who had made her his sexual slave, and so she asked the brothers to wait until she did so. She pretended that all was as usual but asked the tiger for the skin of an old woman, which he brought from his next killing expedition. When he was due home the next time, Thabaton set the hut on fire and made sure the burning skin was clearly visible. When the tiger came home, he thought the skin was Thabaton and leaped into the fire and died. (Beck et al.)
Trikala When Brahma noticed Shiva making love with Parvati, he imagined Vishnu and, from the unified power of three gods, Trikala burst forth. She had three distinct bodies, one beautiful and creative, known as Brahmi; one red and abundant, called Vaisnavi; and one black destroyer named Raudri. This goddess was later assimilated to Prakrti. (Pintchman 1994)
Tripura-sundari Third in importance among Tantric goddesses (after Kali and Tara), Tripura-sundari is depicted as a shining goddess holding weapons in her four hands, covered with jewels and crowned with the moon, seated on a throne composed of the corpses of gods. She lives high in the Himalayas, where sages and heavenly women worship her. There she decks her crystal body with tigers’ skins and drapes snakes around her neck. Tripura-sundari serves as a protective goddess, for her myth describes how she helped the gods when the demon Bhanda attacked. She led an army of goddesses against the demon, who laughed at the sight of female warriors under the banner of the goddess, here called Lalita. But the demon judged wrongly, for Tripura-sundari cast forth innumerable deities from her body (including Durga), who fought the corresponding demons that Bhanda produced. The goddess prevailed, in the process reenlivening the god of love, Kama, who had been killed before the battle started. In addition to her role as a protector, Tripura-sundari is also associated with passion; she is the wife of Kama or a form of Ra tri. Many titles describe her as passionate and beautiful, filled with erotic desire. Even heavenly beings were aroused by her, for which reason a young woman often stood for the goddess in worship ceremonies, receiving honors to each part of her body. Her voluptuous nature notwithstanding, Tripura-sundari has a fierce side, whence she wears skulls and has a long, protruding tongue. A myth explains this apparent contradiction: Kali was once insulted by Shiva and withdrew to practice asceticism. When a sage convinced Kali to return, she did not realize that her austerities had turned her complexion white and, seeing her own reflection in Shiva’s heart, thought it was another goddess and became enraged. Shiva told her that she was now light and beautiful and would henceforth be known under the name Tripura-sundari, ‘‘beautiful in three worlds.’’ A temple in Varanasi, dedicated to Tripura-sundari under the name of Rajarajesvari, is so suffused with her presence that no one can spend a night there without going mad. (Dempsey; Kinsley 1997; Warrier)
Tushu This Bengali agricultural goddess is honored in public and private worship. Her popular annual festival marks completion of harvest. Songs are sung each night asking that the goddess will be generous with her gifts during the following year. Some songs describe Tushu as a village woman who protects fields against invaders, although more typically she is a divine woman whose domain includes rivers, important for irrigation, as well as the fertile fields. (McDaniel 2003)
Uma When Parvati mastered the ascetic arts, her skin became golden, after which she was called Uma, ‘‘light’’ or ‘‘beauty.’’ (This form of Parvati is also associated with the golden Gauri.) She was the reincarnation of Sati and awaited marriage with her intended mate, Shiva. It had been predicted that their child would kill the demon who threatened the gods. Shiva did not wish to marry, so Kama, god of love, was sent to inspire him. But when he shot his arrow toward the god, Shiva deflected it, killing Kama with his own darts. Uma, stricken with guilt, collapsed. Dressed as a hermit, she began to meditate upon Shiva, thus attracting his attentions. As part of his courtship, Shiva restored Kama to life. As prophesied, the child of Shiva and Uma grew up to free the gods from the demon who threatened them. (Beswick; Danielou 1964, 2007; Ions; Kinsley 1986; McDermott; O’Flaherty 1975; Sharma; Zimmer 1946)
Urvasi Most famous of the Apsara s was Urvasi (a name sometimes used of Usas). She was born when a sage surrounded by tempting Apsaras slapped his thigh, causing energy to fly out in female form. Like others of her kind, she was both lustful and loving. Once she consented to live with a human king but told him that human nakedness disgusted her. He promised she would never see him unclothed. But he broke his promise, and when Urvasi caught one glimpse of his naked body, she instantly fled. Unhappy without her, the king grew more and more wicked until his subjects revolted and killed him. Other tales about the couple say that when he promised to become an erotic singer-dancer, Urvasi agreed to return; that Urvasi either complained or bragged about his making love to her three times a day; and that Urvasi taught him the secrets of immortality. Occasionally, Urvasi appears in animal form, as a waterbird or a mare. (Danielou 1964; Dimmitt and van Buitenen; Ions; O’Flaherty 1980; Zimmer 1946)
Usas The dawn goddess, popular in Vedic times, stayed eternally young but made men grow older. She appeared each morning, driving a chariot drawn by red horses and throwing off her bright red blouse to reveal shining breasts that filled the heavens with splendor. The sun relentlessly pursues Usas across the sky, intent upon ravishing her. Another myth says that Brahma, her father, turned the beautiful Usas into a deer and raped her in that form. A goddess who can appear as singular, dual or multiple, Usas’s name (‘‘burning’’) emphasizes her solar connections. She is sometimes said to be the sister of Ratri, both of them daughters of the sky. Her connection with the chief of the Apsaras, Urvasi, is unclear. (Beswick; Danielou 1964; Ions; Kinsley 1986; Thadani; Zimmer 1955)
Usnisavijaya Buddhist goddess of long life, Usnisavijaya assures worshipers that they will not have an untimely death or be reborn in a lower form of existence. She emerged when the Buddha, asked by Indra to have mercy upon a carefree prince who would be reborn as a dog, promised that those who honored Usnisavijaya would not be subjected to such difficulties. She extends life by purifying karma and bringing the devotee to a state of blissful surrender. She also permits entrance to the paradise where residents can move towards enlightenment without descending into the human realm. (Shaw 2006)
Uyugsum Among the mountain people called the Koraput, this mythic woman cut her own daughter’s throat in order to have something to eat. But the child’s soul blazed out through the wound and threatened the world with a holocaust. To avoid the world’s destruction, Uyugsum swallowed her daughter. She then rose up from the earth into the sky where, lit from within by her daughter, she is now the sun. (Obeyesekere 1984)
Vac Goddess of eloquence, Vac can appear as a form of Sarasvati or a separate divinity. Called the mother of the Vedas, she is associated with the important symbol of abundance, the cow. One text says that she is present in all worship. She is also the mother of the celestial nymphs, the Apsaras. She is envisioned as a queenly woman, wearing gold, graceful of movement, benevolent and generous. (Danielou 1964; Kinsley 1986)
Vaisn o Devi This Kashmiri goddess is honored with pilgrimages to a vagina-like cave at the end of a nine-mile trail up a 6000-foot peak called Trikuta. Attested to a millennium ago, the pilgrimages draw as many as 5 million people who make the difficult ascent each year. Manifest in three rounded boulders, she is Devi, who reincarnated in a young girl in order to vanquish demons. (Pintchman 2001)
Vajrayogini The supreme goddess in Tantric Buddhism, Vajrayogini offers an image of the highest enlightenment. With bright red skin, she holds a bowl made from a skull and brandishes a crescent-bladed knife. Like other D akinis, Vajrayogini represents liberation from human life. As an instructor in Tantric mysteries, Vajrayogini (‘‘indestructible practitioner of yoga’’) asks male adepts to serve women as embodiments of herself, offering food, flowers, and sexual satisfaction. Although early scholars of Tantra envisioned the sexual practices as debasing to women, recent feminist scholarship points to figures such as Vajrayogini as evidence of a contrary tendency. Because of her Buddha nature, Vajrayogini is three-bodied: her ‘‘truth body’’ is pure radiance, while another ‘‘bliss body’’ allows her to frolic through time and space, and her ‘‘transformation body’’ is tangible to gross human senses. She mostly stays in her bliss body, enjoying the pleasures of her paradisiacal home, surrounded by Dakinis. The rainbow is her signature, for her adepts dissolve into rainbows at death. (Hiltebeitel and Erndl; Shaw 2006)
Valil  In Tamil-speaking areas of southern India, the romance of Valil  and her consort, the handsome god Murugan, has been a popular part of religious life for more than a century. Valli’s mother was a doe who was raped by a male hermit. The baby was rejected by her deer mother, who nonetheless made a hole to protect the infant, who was shortly found by a group of hunters. Brought up as the adoptive child of the hunters’ king, Valil  attracted the eye of a wandering god, who drew her picture and took it to his lord, Murugan. Infatuated with the wild woman, Murugan approached her directly, inviting her to have sex with him, but to no avail. So he came in the form of a merchant, offering bangles, only to be rejected once again. Finally, he came disguised as a sage and, when Valli once again spurned him, created the illusion of a stampeding elephant to drive the girl into his protective arms. Then he turned into the handsome god he truly was and won her love. Though Vali’sl     family resisted, they were ultimately won over by the god, and the wedding was celebrated with great joy. (Handelman; Hawley and Wulff 1982; Jayakar)
Vasudha ra The Buddhist goddess of wealth is similar to Hindu Laksmi, with whom she shares many iconographic traits. Indeed, her name is also sometimes used as a title of Laksmi. In Nepal, Vasudhara (‘‘stream of good fortune’’ or ‘‘fortune-giver’’) is a popular goddess invoked for riches including healthy children as well as productive fields. (Dehejia; Larson et al.; Shaw 2006)
Vindhyavasini In the mountains that bear her name, and in a village named for her, the local goddess Vindhyavasini has her temple complex. Although brought into the Hindu pantheon through the story of how she saved the baby Krishna from death by incarnating herself as a substitute victim (see Nidra  and Yasoda for more of this story), she existed earlier as a local goddess, perhaps one of the most ancient divinities of the region. Pilgrimages to her temple remain popular, as does Tantric meditation upon her yantra or sacred image. (Hawley and Wulff 1996)
Vira j This name for the great creatrix appears in Vedic literature, including the Rg Veda, where she and her consort simultaneously gave birth to each other. In other texts she is described as dual-sexed, while yet others give her a masculine gender. In all cases, she appears as the creative power of the universe and the foundation upon which the material world depends. (Pintchman 1994)
Vrinda The loyal wife of a demon king, Vrinda’s virtue protected her husband from the gods’ attempts to slay him. To negate her power, the gods sent Vishnu to her, disguised as her husband. When Vindra was unable to see that she was not making love chastely to her husband, she left him unprotected, and he was killed by Shiva. Another story told of Vrinda was that she was such a loyal wife that she performed intense austerities in order to gain the boom of immortality for her husband, but he only grew arrogant with her protection and went to war against the gods themselves, even lusting after the goddess Parvati in the presence of Vrinda. Vrinda, however, remained loyal and prayed to Vishnu to aid her husband. But the god, more loyal to the other gods than to his devotee, sent her a corpse disguised to look like her husband, over which she began to mourn. Thus tricked into revealing that she was not perfect in her wifely devotion, Vrinda learned that her mistake had indeed cost her husband his life. Furious, she cursed the gods, who turned her into the plant called Tulsi (‘‘the incomparable one,’’ Indian basil), still revered as a holy plant in India today. (Babb; Gupta, Sakti 1971; McDaniel 2003; Pattanaik)
Yaksi These voluptuous figures, found in 3rd–1st centuries BCE  sculptures, may descend from indigenous woodland love goddesses, as they are not part of the Vedic pantheon. Associated with trees and water, thus known as nature goddesses, the heavy-breasted Yaksi are depicted surrounded by animals and, occasionally, male figures called Yaksa. The Yaksi were irresistibly beautiful, so much so that the love god never bothered to use his arrows when they were around. Their bodies were a perfect blend of slenderness and plumpness, for they had massive breasts, hips, and thighs but girlish waists. Artists’ representations of them show them scantily attired but wearing magnificent jewelry. Often, to emphasize their connection with nature, a Yaksi stands beneath a tree, fondling its branches. She may also point to her barely covered genitals, emphasizing her connection with fertility. Occasionally the Yaksi appears terrifying, luring men to their deaths with unearthly beauty. Such Yaksi enjoy men’s sexual favors before eating them, but even demonic Yaksi could be converted. Although the figures are well attested in Hindu contexts, they also appear in Buddhism, where the Yaksini appear on temples and shrines as sculptured maidens who protect the inner sanctum. The Yaksi Hariti was singled out for worship and became the focus of a major devotional cultus in Indian Buddhism and became established across the Asian world. Finally, the Yaksi are honored with devotional practices as Jaina goddesses. (Cort; Dehejia; Subramaniam; Ions; Shaw 2006; Young 2004)
Yami This primal goddess asked her brother, Yama, to inseminate her so the world might be populated. But he refused, preferring to die childless than to engage in a befouling sin. He became lord of the dead, while Yami became the night goddess Yamini. In some versions, Yamini was created to soften the pain of rejection that Yami felt. Some sources said that Yami mated with her brother, producing the human race before Yama grew doubtful as to the sanctity of their behavior. In Bengal, she is identified with the goddess Yamuna, divinity of the Jumna river. (Bonnefoy; Danielou 1964; Ions; Pattanaik; Zimmer 1955)
Yasoda Foster mother of Krishna, Yasoda was pregnant with Nidra  when the alsopregnant Devaki was threatened with the death of her child. The two fetuses were switched, so that imprisoned Devaki gave birth to the goddess, who flew away, while Yasoda gave birth to Krishna, safe from the threatening king Kam sa. Thereafter, Yasoda raised Krishna as her own son. A cowherd or Gopi, Yasoda brought her friends to admire the growing child, and when he was grown they danced to his flute. (Ions)
Yeshey Tsogyal ‘‘Bliss Queen’’ is the title of this Tibetan goddess born in warrior form from a lotus blossom. She is a figure of enlightenment among Tibetan Buddhists, seen as a form of Ta ra  or Vajrayogini. She was incarnated in the 8th century as a Tibetan queen, who was fully enlightened but chose to appear as a young girl. She showed herself to be a spiritual adept from childhood, despite persecution. Once installed as queen, Yeshey Tsogyal taught spiritual discipline through her words and her extreme asceticism. She is depicted as red and naked, revealing her vulva for her devotees’ edification. (Atkinson et al.)
Yogini These spirits play important parts in Tantric practice, whose female adepts are called by this name. Like Apsara s, these celestial beings can fly or transform themselves into birds. They are envisioned as full-breasted, small-waisted women; sometimes they have animal heads. Their special role is to protect Tantric practitioners, but they also punish those who are initiated but lapse in their practices (as such, they are equated with Dakinis). Yoginis may appear as mother, sister, or wife, or the same Yogini may take these different roles with a practitioner. (Hiltebeitel and Erndl; McDaniel 2004; Stoddard)
Yuk The primal mother Yuk of northeast India was a lightning goddess who helped create life. Because earth was bare, she revealed her genitals, and her sun-bright vulva flashed lightning across the sky. This brought rain, which nourished the earth so that plants burst forth. (Elwin 1958)